@text=Aitareyopaniṣad
@dcs-id=421
@translator=Patrick Olivelle
@digitized-by=
@prepared-by=Oliver Hellwig
@language=English
1.1.1 In the beginning this world was the self (atman), one alone, and there was no
other being at all that blinked an eye. He thought to himself: "Let me create the
worlds."
1.2 2 So he created these worlds—the flood, the glittering specks, the mortal, and
the waters. Now, the flood is up there beyond the sky, and its foundation is the sky.
The glittering specks are the intermediate world. The mortal is the earth, and what is
underneath are the waters.
1.1.3 He further thought to himself: "Now that these worlds are in place, I had better create their keepers." From those very waters he drew out and gave a definite shape to a man.
1.1.4 He incubated that man. From that man so incubated——a mouth was hatched like an egg; from the mouth sprang speech, and from speech, fire. —a pair of nostrils was hatched; from the nostrils sprang out-breath, and from out-breath, the wind. —a pair of eyes was hatched; from the eyes sprang sight, and from sight, the sun. —a pair of ears was hatched; from the ears sprang hearing, and from hearing, the quarters. —a skin was hatched; from the skin sprang the body hairs, and from the body hairs, plants and trees. —a heart was hatched; from the heart sprang the mind, and from the mind, the moon. —a navel was hatched; from the navel sprang the in-breath, and from the inbreath, death. —a penis was hatched; from the penis sprang semen, and from semen, the waters.

1.2.1 Once these deities were created, they fell into this vast ocean here. It afflicted him with hunger and thirst. Those deities then said to him: "Find us a dwelling in which we can establish ourselves and eat food."
1.2.2 So he brought a cow up to them, but they said: "That's totally inadequate for us." Then he brought a horse up to them, but they said: "That's totally inadequate for us." 
1.2.3 Finally he brought a man up to them, and they exclaimed: "Now, this is well made!" for man is indeed well made. Then he told them: "Enter, each into your respective dwelling."
1.2.4 So, the fire became speech and entered the mouth; the wind became out-breath and entered the nostrils; the sun became sight and entered the eyes; the quarters became hearing and entered the ears; the plants and trees became body hairs and entered the skin; the moon became mind and entered the heart; death became the in-breath and entered the navel; the waters became semen and entered the penis.
1.2.5 Thereupon, hunger and thirst told him: "Find one for us also." He told them: "I give you a share in what belongs to these very deities, and I make you sharers with them." As a consequence, to whatever deity one may make an offering, hunger and thirst share it with that deity

1.3.1 He then thought to himself: "Now that these worlds and their keepers are in place, I had better create food for them."
1.3.2 2 So he incubated the waters. When the waters were incubated, there emerged from them something solid. And the solid thing that emerged was food.
1.3.3 No sooner was it created than it sought to escape. He tried to capture it with speech. But he was unable to capture it with speech, for had he captured it with speech, one would satisfy one's appetite by simply mentioning food.
1.3.4 He tried to capture it with the out-breath. But he was unable to capture it with the out-breath, for had he captured it with the out-breath, one would satisfy one's appetite by simply breathing upon food.
1.3.5 He tried to capture it with sight. But he was unable to capture it with sight, for had he captured it with sight, one would satisfy one's appetite by simply looking at food.
1.3.6 He tried to capture it with hearing. But he was unable to capture it with hearing, for had he captured it with hearing, one would satisfy one's appetite by simply hearing about food.
1.3.7 He tried to capture it with the skin. But he was unable to capture it with the skin, for had he captured it with the skin, one would satisfy one's appetite by simply touching food.
1.3.8 He tried to capture it with the mind. But he was unable to capture it with the mind, for had he captured it with the mind, one would satisfy one's appetite by simply thinking about food.
1.3.9 He tried to capture it with the penis. But he was unable to capture it with the penis, for had he captured it with the penis, one would satisfy one's appetite by simply ejaculating food.
1.3.10 Finally, he tried to capture it with the in-breath, and then he managed to consume it. So, the wind is the one that captures food, for the wind (vayu) is the foodfinder (annayu).
1.3.11 Then he thought to himself: "How can this possibly carry on without me?" And he thought: "Through which of these shall I enter?" He thought: "If speaking is done through speech; if breathing out is done through the out-breath; if seeing is done through sight; if hearing is done through hearing; if touching is done through the skin; if thinking is done through the mind; if breathing in is done through the inbreath; and if ejaculating is done through the penis—then who am I?"
1.3.12 So he split open the head at the point where the hairs part and entered through that gate. This gate (dvar) has the name "Split" (vidrti), and that is the heaven of pleasure (nananda). He has three dwellings, three levels of sleep—this is one dwelling, this is another, and this is the third.
1.3.13 After he was born, he contemplated the creatures with the thought: "Will anyone declare there to be another here?" But he saw only that man, the brahman, the utmost, and he said, "This (idam) I have seen (adarsam)!"
1.3.14 Therefore, he is called "Idandra." Now, his name is Idandra; but even though he is Idandra, people cryptically call him Indra, because the gods somehow love the cryptic.


2.1.1 At the outset, this embryo comes into being within a man as semen. This radiance gathered from all the bodily parts he bears in himself (atman) as himself (atman). And when a man deposits it in a woman, he gives birth to it. That is his first birth.
2.1.2 It becomes one with the woman's body (atman), as if it were a part of her own body. As a result, it does not harm her. And she nourishes this self (atman) of his that has entered her.
2.1.3 As she nourishes him, so he should nourish her. The woman carries him as the embryo. At the beginning,he nourishes the child even before its birth. When he nourishes the child even before its birth, he thereby nourishes himself (atman) for the continuance of these worlds, for it is in this way that these worlds continue. That is his second birth.
2.1.4 And he—this self (atman) of his—is appointed to carry out holy rites, while his other self, after it has done all it has to do, becomes old and dies. As soon as he departs from this world, he is born again. That is his third birth.
2.1.5 This very point has been made by a seer: I knew all the births of these gods, While I was still within the womb. A hundred iron forts encaged me, Then the falcon—swiftly I flew away. Vamadeva spoke this way while he was still lying here within the womb.
2.1.6 Knowing this, he went up after the dissolution of this body and, having obtained all his desires in the heavenly world up there, became immortal.

3.1.1 "Who is this self (atman)?"—that is how we venerate. Which of these is the self? Is it that by which one sees? Or hears? Or smells odors? Or utters speech? Or distinguishes between what is tasty and what is not?
3.1.2 Is it the heart and the mind? Is it awareness? Perception? Discernment? Cognition? Wisdom? Insight? Steadfastness? Thought? Reflection? Drive? Memory? Intention? Purpose? Will? Love? Desire? But these are various designations of cognition.
3.1.3 It is brahman; it is Indra; it is Prajapati; it is all the gods. It is these five immense beings—earth, wind, space, the waters, and the lights; it is these beings, as well as those that are some sort of mixture of trivial beings, living beings of various sorts — those born from eggs, from wombs, from sweat, and from sprouts. It is horses, cattle, men, and elephants. It is everything that has life—those that move, those that fly, and those that are stationary. Knowledge is the eye of all that, and on knowledge it is founded. Knowledge is the eye of the world, and knowledge, the foundation. Brahman is knowing.
3.1.4 It is with this self consisting of knowledge that he went up from this world and, having obtained all his desire in the heavenly world up there, became immortal.