@text=Chāndogyopaniṣad
@dcs-id=365
@translator=Patrick Olivelle
@digitized-by=
@prepared-by=Oliver Hellwig
@language=English
1.1.1 OM—one should venerate the High Chant as this syllable, for one begins the High Chant with OM. Here is a further explanation of that syllable.
1.1.2 The essence of these beings here is the earth; the essence of the earth is the waters; the essence of the waters is plants; the essence of plants is man; the essence of man is speech; the essence of speech is the Rg verse; the essence of the Rg verse is the Saman chant; the essence of the Saman chant is the High Chant.
1.1.3 This High Chant is the quintessence of all essences; it is the highest, the ultimate, the eighth.
1.1.4 What ultimately is the Rg verse? What ultimately is the Saman chant? What ultimately is the High Chant? These questions have been the subject of critical inquiry.
1.1.5 The Rg is nothing but speech; the Saman is breath; and the High Chant is this syllable OM. Speech and breath, the Rg and the Saman—each of these sets, clearly, is a pair in coitus.
1.1.6 This pair in coitus unites in the syllable OM, and when a pair unites in coitus, they satisfy each other's desire.
1.1.7 So, when someone knows this and venerates the High Chant as this syllable, he will surely become a man who satisfies desires.
1.1.8 Clearly, this syllable signifies assent, for one says "OM" when one assents to something. And assent is nothing but fulfillment. So, when someone knows this and venerates the High Chant as this syllable, he will surely become a man who fulfills desires.
1.1.9 It is by means of this syllable that the triple Veda continues—the Adhvaryu priest says "OM" before he issues a call; the Hotr says "OM" before he makes an invocation; and the Udgatr says "OM" before he sings the High Chant. They do so to honor this very syllable, because of its greatness and because it is the essence.
1.1.10 Those who know this and those who do not both perform these rites using this syllable. But knowledge and ignorance are two very different things. Only what is performed with knowledge, with faith, and with an awareness of the hidden connections (upanisad) becomes truly potent. Now, then—that was a further explanation of this very syllable.


1.3.1 What follows is with respect to the divine sphere. One should venerate the High Chant as the sun up there that gives warmth. As it rises (udyan), it sings the High Chant (udgayati) for the creatures. As it rises, it dispels darkness and fear. Anyone who knows this is sure to become a man who dispels fear and darkness.
1.3.2 This breath in here and that sun up there are exactly the same. This is warm, and so is that. People call this sound (svara), and they call that shine (svara) and shining back (pratyasvara). Therefore, one should venerate the High Chant as both this here and that up there.
1.3.3 Now, then, one should venerate the High Chant as just the inter-breath. When one breathes out, it is the out-breath; when one breathes in, it is the in-breath. And the inter-breath is where the out-breath and the in-breath meet. The inter-breath is the same as speech. One speaks, therefore, without breathing out or in.
1.3.4 Speech is the same as the Rg verse. One recites a Rg verse, therefore, without breathing out or in. The Rg verse is the same as the Saman chant. One sings a Saman chant, therefore, without breathing out or in. The Saman chant is the same as the High Chant. One sings the High Chant, therefore, without breathing out or in.
1.3.5 Even activities other than these, activities that require strength, such as churning a fire, running a race, and stretching a strong bow, are performed without breathing out or in. For this reason, one should venerate the High Chant as just the inter-breath.
1.3.6 Now, then, one should venerate the syllables of the word udgitha—High Chant—namely ud, gi, and tha. The syllable ud is simply breath, for people rise up (ud-stha-) by means of breath; the syllable gi is speech, for speech utterances are called words (gir); and the syllable tha is food, for this whole world rests (sthita) on food.
1.3.7 The syllable ud, likewise, is the sky, gi is the intermediate region, and tha is the earth. And again, the syllable ud is the sun, gi is the wind, and tha is the fire. So also, the syllable ud is the Samaveda, gi is the Yajurveda, and tha is the Rgveda. When someone knows them in this way and venerates these syllables of the High Chant, namely, ud, gi, and tha—speech will yield for him the milk which is the very milk of speech, and he will come to own and to eat his own food.
1.3.8 Now, then, this is how wishes are fulfilled. One should venerate the following as things to turn to. A man should repair to the Saman chant which he is about to use in a liturgical praise,
1.3.9 to the Rg verse which supplies the lyrics of that chant, and to the seer who composed that verse. A man should repair to the deity whom he is about to praise with that chant.
1.3.10 A man should repair to the meter of the chant which he is about to use in his praise. A man should repair to the arrangement of the chant which he is about to use in his praise.
1.3.11 A man should repair to the direction to which he addresses his praise.
1.3.12 Turning to himself (atman), finally, he should sing the hymn of praise, focusing his mind completely on his wish. He can certainly expect that the wish he had as he sang the praise will be fulfilled.


2.22.1 "I choose the roaring way of singing the Saman, the singing that resembles the lowing of an animal" — that is the High Chant of the fire. The indistinct way of singing it is the High Chant of Prajapati; the distinct way of singing it is the High Chant of Soma; the soft and smooth way of singing it is the High Chant of the wind; the smooth and powerful way of singing it is the High Chant of Indra; the way of singing it that sounds like a heron is the High Chant of Brhaspati; and the dissonant way of singing it is the High Chant of Varuna. One should employ all these ways of singing, except that of Varuna, which alone one should avoid.
2.22.2 When a person sings to obtain something, he should do so with the thought, "Let me obtain immortality for the gods by my singing." Likewise, he should be careful to keep the following thoughts in his mind as he sings the songs of praise: "Let me obtain by my singing food offerings for the ancestors, the fulfillment of wishes for humans, fodder and water for animals, heaven for the patron of the sacrifice, and food for myself (atman)."
2.22.3 All the vowels are corporeal forms (atman) of Indra. All the spirants are corporeal forms of Prajapati. And all the stops are corporeal forms of Death. So, if someone criticizes him for the way he pronounces his vowels, he should tell that man: "I have taken refuge in Indra, and he will rebut you."
2.22.4 And if someone criticizes him for the way he pronounces his spirants, he should tell that man: "I have taken refuge in Prajapati, and he will crush you." And if someone criticizes him for the way he pronounces his stops, he should tell that man: "I have taken refuge in Death, and he will burn you up."
2.22.5 One should pronounce all the vowels with resonance and emphasis, thinking, "Let me give strength to Indra." One should pronounce all the spirants without swallowing or ejecting them, and with an open passage between the tongue and the place of articulation, thinking, "Let me surrender myself (atman) to Prajapati." One should pronounce all the stops, checking slightly and thus separating them from the following sounds so that they are not absorbed into them, thinking, "Let me save myself from Death."

2.23.1 There are three types of persons whose torso is the Law (dharma). The first is one who pursues sacrifice, vedic recitation, and gift-giving. The second is one who is devoted solely to austerity. The third is a celibate student of the Veda living at his teacher's house — that is, a student who settles himself permanently at his teacher's house. All these gain worlds earned by merit. A person who is steadfast in brahman reaches immortality. 
2.23.2 Prajapati incubated the worlds, and, when they had been incubated, the triple Veda sprang from them. He incubated the triple Veda, and, when it had been incubated, these syllables "bhur, bhuvas, svar" sprang from it.
2.23.3 He incubated these syllables, and, when they had been incubated, the syllable OM sprang from them. As all the leaves are bored through by a pin, so all words are bored through by OM. This whole world is nothing but OM.

2.24.1 Those who articulate formulations of truth (brahman) inquire: "Since the morning pressing of Soma belongs to the Vasus, the midday pressing to the Rudras, and the third pressing to the Adityas and the All-gods,
2.24.2 what world is then left for the patron of the sacrifice?" If a man does not know the answer to this, how can he carry out a sacrifice? So, only a man who knows it should carry it out.
2.24.3 Before the command to recite the morning litany has been issued, the patron sits facing the north behind the householder's fire and sings the Saman of the Vasus:
2.24.4 Open the door to the world! Let us see you—to win Sovereignty!
2.24.5 Then he puts the offering of ghee in the fire, saying: "Homage to the fire dwelling on the earth, dwelling in the world! Secure that world for me, for the patron—for that is the patron's world. I will go
2.24.6 there after death—I the patron— svaha! Throw back the bolt!" After saying this, he gets up. The Vasus present to him the morning pressing.
2.24.7 Before the command to undertake the midday pressing has been issued, the patron sits facing the north behind the Agnidhriya fire and sings the Saman of the Rudras:
2.24.8 Open the door to the world! Let us see you—to win Broad Sovereignty!
2.24.9 Then he puts the offering of ghee in the fire, saying: "Homage to the wind dwelling in the intermediate world, dwelling in the world! Secure that world for me, for the patron—for that is the patron's world. I will go
2.24.10 there after death—I the patron—svaha! Throw back the bolt!" After saying this, he gets up. The Rudras present to him the midday pressing.
2.24.11 Before the command to undertake the third pressing has been issued, the patron sits facing the north behind the offertorial fire and sings the Saman of the Adityas and of the All-gods:
2.24.12 Open the door to the world! Let us see you—to win Full Sovereignty! That is the Saman of the Adityas.
2.24.13 Next, the Saman of the All-gods: Open the door to the world! Let us see you—to win Absolute Sovereignty!
2.24.14 Then he pours the offering of ghee in the fire, saying: "Homage to the Adityas and the All-gods dwelling in the sky, dwelling in the world! Secure that world for me, for the patron—
2.24.15 for that is the patron's world. I will go there after death—I the patron—svaha! Throw back the bolt!" After saying this, he gets up.
2.24.16 The Adityas and the All-gods present to him the third pressing. A man who knows this undoubtedly knows the full measure of the sacrifice.


3.1.1 The honey of the gods, clearly, is the sun up there. The crossbar for it is the sky itself; the hive is the intermediate region; and the larvae are the glittering specks.
3.1.2 Its easterly honey cells are simply the easterly rays of the sun—the bees being the Rg verses, and the flower, the Rgveda, which is also the immortal waters. These very Rg verses
3.1.3 incubated the Rgveda, and, when it had been incubated, its essence sprang from it in the form of luster, splendor, power, strength, and foodstuff.
3.1.4 All that flowed out and made its way to the sun; and that is what constitutes the red appearance of the sun.


3.2.1 Its southerly honey cells are simply the southerly rays of the sun—the bees being the Yajus formulas, and the flower, the Yajurveda, which is also the immortal waters.
3.2.2 These very Yajus formulas incubated the Yajurveda, and, when it had been incubated, its essence sprang from it in the form of luster, splendor, power, strength, and foodstuff.
3.2.3 All that flowed out and made its way to the sun; and that is what constitutes the white appearance of the sun.

3.5.1 Its upward honey cells are simply the upward rays of the sun—the bees being the secret rules of substitution, and the flower, the formulation of truth (brahman), which is also the immortal waters.
3.5.2 These very secret rules of substitution incubated the formulation of truth, and, when it had been incubated, its essence sprang from it in the form of luster, splendor, power, strength, and foodstuff.
3.5.3 All that flowed out and made its way to the sun; and that is the flickering of a sort seen in the middle of the sun.
3.5.4 These, clearly, are the very essence of the essences, for the essences are the Vedas, and these are their essence. These are, moreover, the immortal nectar of nectars, for the nectars are the Vedas, and these are their nectar.

3.6.1 On the first nectar among these the Vasus subsist with fire as their mouth. The gods, of course, neither eat nor drink. They become sated by just looking at this nectar.
3.6.2 Into that same [red] appearance they enter, and from that appearance they emerge.
3.6.3 When someone knows this nectar in this way—he becomes one with those very Vasus and, with fire itself as his mouth, becomes sated by just looking at this nectar; he enters into this same appearance and emerges from this appearance;
3.6.4 and he will achieve dominion and sovereignty over these very Vasus for as long as the sun shall rise in the east and set in the west.

3.12.1 Whatever there is, this entire creation—clearly, all that is the Gayatri. And the Gayatri is speech, for speech sings (gayati) and protects (trayati) this entire creation.
3.12.2 Now, take this Gayatri—clearly, it is just the same as this earth here, for this entire creation rests upon the earth and never extends beyond its limits.
3.12.3 And take this earth—clearly, it is just the same as this body of a person here, for these vital functions (prana) rest within the body and never extend beyond its limits.
3.12.4 And take this body of a person here—clearly, it is just the same as this heart here within a person, for these vital functions rest within the heart and never extend beyond its limits.
3.12.5 This is the Gayatri that consists of four quarters and six types. This is declared in a Rg verse:
3.12.6 Such is his greatness— Even greaterthan that is that person. One quarter of him are all creatures, Three quarters the immortal in heaven.
3.12.7 And take what people call "brahman"—clearly, it is nothing but this space here outside a person. And this space here outside a person—
3.12.8 clearly, it is the same as this space here within a person.
3.12.9 And this space here within a person—clearly, it is the same as this space here within the heart; it is full and nondepleting. Anyone who knows this obtains full and nondepleting prosperity. 


3.13.1 Now, this heart here contains five openings for the deities. As regards its eastern opening—it is the out-breath, it is sight, it is the sun. And one should venerate it as splendor and as foodstuff. Anyone who knows this becomes full of splendor and an eater of food.
3.13.2 As regards its southern opening—it is the inter-breath, it is hearing, it is the moon. And one should venerate it as prosperity and fame. Anyone who knows this becomes prosperous and famous.
3.13.3 As regards its western opening—it is the in-breath, it is speech, it is the fire. And one should venerate it as the luster of sacred knowledge and as foodstuff. Anyone who knows this becomes full of the luster of sacred knowledge and an eater of food.
3.13.4 As regards its northern opening—it is the link-breath, it is the mind, it is the rain. And one should venerate it as renown and beauty. Anyone who knows this becomes renowned and beautiful.
3.13.5 As regards its upper opening—it is the up-breath, it is the wind, it is space. And one should venerate it as vigor and might. Anyone who knows this becomes vigorous and mighty.
3.13.6 These, indeed, are the five courtiers of brahman, the doorkeepers of heaven. When someone knows these five courtiers of brahman, these doorkeepers of heaven, in this way—a hero will be born to his family, and he will go to heaven. 3.13.7-8 Now, far above here the light that shines from heaven on the backs of everything, on the backs of all things, in the very highest of the high worlds—it is clearly this very same light here within a man. We see it when, on touching the body, we feel the warmth within it. We hear it when, as we press our ears shut, we hear something like the hum and the noise of a blazing fire. One should venerate this light as something seen and heard. Anyone who knows this will become handsome and famous.



3.14.1. Brahman, you see, is this whole world. With inner tranquillity, one should venerate it as jalan. Now, then, man is undoubtedly made of resolve. What a man becomes on departing from here after death is in accordance with his resolve in this world. So he should make this resolve:
3.14.2-3 "This self (atman) of mine that lies deep within my heart—it is made of mind; the vital functions (prana) are its physical form; luminous is its appearance; the real is its intention; space is its essence (atman); it contains all actions, all desires, all smells, and all tastes; it has captured this whole world; it neither speaks nor pays any heed. "This self (atman) of mine that lies deep within my heart—it is smaller than a grain of rice or barley, smaller than a mustard seed, smaller even than a millet grain or a millet kernel; but it is larger than the earth, larger than the intermediate region, larger than the sky, larger even than all these worlds put together.
3.14.4 "This self (atman) of mine that lies deep within my heart—it contains all actions, all desires, all smells, and all tastes; it has captured this whole world; it neither speaks nor pays any heed. "It is brahman. On departing from here after death, I will become that." A man who has this resolve is never beset at all with doubts. This is what Sandilya used to say.

5.3.1 Svetaketu, the son of Aruni, came one day into the assembly of the land of Pancala. Pravahana Jaivali asked him: "Son, did your father teach you?" Svetaketu replied: "Yes indeed, my lord."
5.3.2 "Do you know where people go from here when they die?" "No, my lord." "Do you know how they return again?" "No, my lord." "Do you know how the two paths — the path to the gods and the path to the fathers—take different turns?" "No, my lord."
5.3.3 "Do you know how that world up there is not filled up?" "No, my lord." "Do you know how at the fifth offering the water takes on a human voice?" "Not at all, my lord."
5.3.4 "Did you not say that you had been educated? Without knowing these things how can anyone call himself educated?" Deeply hurt, Svetaketu returned to his father's house and told him: "Without actually teaching me, I dare say, you told me, sir, that you had taught me!
5.3.5 That excuse for a prince asked me five questions, and I couldn't answer a single one of them." The father said: "As you report them to me, son, I do not know the answer to even one of them. If I had known them, how could I have not taught them to you?"
5.3.6 Gautama then came to the king's place. When he arrived, the king received him with respect. In the morning Gautama went into the assembly hall, and the king said to him: "Gautama, sir, choose a gift of human riches." Gautama responded: "Keep your human riches, Your Majesty. Tell me exactly what you told my boy." The king became worried
5.3.7 and ordered him to stay a while longer. Finally he told him: "As you have told me, Gautama, before you this knowledge has never reached Brahmins. In all the worlds, therefore, government has belonged exclusively to royalty." The king then told him:


5.9.1 "Therefore it is said: 'at the fifth offering the waters take on a human voice.' Covered by the placenta, the fetus lies inside the womb for nine or ten months or thereabouts and is then born.
5.9.2 Once he is born, he lives his allotted life span. When he has departed, when he has reached his appointed time—they take him to the very fire from which he came, from which he sprang.


5.10.1 "Now, the people who know this, and the people here in the wilderness who venerate thus: 'Austerity is faith'—they pass into the flame, from the flame into the day, from the day into the fortnight of the waxing moon, from the fortnight of the waxing moon into the six months when the sun moves north,
5.10.2 from these months into the year, from the year into the sun, from the sun into the moon, and from the moon into lightning. Then a person who is not human—he leads them to brahman. This is the path leading to the gods.
5.10.3 "The people here in villages, on the other hand, who venerate thus: 'Giftgiving is offerings to gods and to priests'—they pass into the smoke, from the smoke into the night, from the night into the fortnight of the waning moon, and from the fortnight of the waning moon into the six months when the sun moves south. These do not reach the year,
5.10.4 but from these months pass into the world of the fathers, and from the world of the fathers into space, and from space into the moon. This is King Soma, the food of the gods, and the gods eat it.
5.10.5 They remain there as long as there is a residue, and then they return by the same path they went — first to space, and from space to the wind. After the wind has formed, it turns into smoke; after the smoke has formed, it turns into a thundercloud;
5.10.6 after the thundercloud has formed, it turns into a rain-cloud; and after a rain-cloud has formed, it rains down. On earth they spring up as rice and barley, plants and trees, sesame and beans, from which it is extremely difficult to get out. When someone eats that food and deposits the semen, from him one comes into being again.
5.10.7  "Now, people here whose behavior is pleasant can expect to enter a pleasant womb, like that of a woman of the Brahmin, the Ksatriya, or the Vaisya class. But people of foul behavior can expect to enter a foul womb, like that of a dog, a pig, or an outcaste woman.
5.10.8  "Then there are those proceeding on neither of these two paths—they become the tiny creatures revolving here ceaselessly. 'Be born! Die!'—that is a third state. "As a result, that world up there is not filled up. "A man should seek to protect himself from that. On this point there is this verse:
5.10.9  A man who steals gold, drinks liquor, and kills a Brahmin; A man who fornicates with his teacher's wife — these four will fall. As also the fifth — he who consorts with them.
5.10.10 "A man who knows these five fires in this way, however, is not tainted with evil even if he associates with such people. Anyone who knows this becomes pure and clean and attains a good world."


8.8.1 "Look at yourselves (atman) in a pan of water. And let me know if there is anything you do not perceive about yourselves." So they looked into a pan of water. Prajapati asked them: "What do you see?" And they replied: "Sir, we see here our entire body (atman), a perfect likeness down to the very hairs of the body, down to the very nails."
8.8.2 Prajapati told them then: "Adorn yourself beautifully, dress well, and spruce yourself up, and then look into a pan of water." So they adorned themselves beautifully, dressed well, and spruced themselves up, and then looked into a pan of water. Prajapati asked them: "What do you see?"
8.8.3 And they replied: "Sir, as the two of us here are beautifully adorned, well dressed, and all spruced up, in exactly the same way are these, sir, beautifully adorned, well dressed, and all spruced up." "That is the self (atman); that is the immortal; that is the one free from fear; that is brahman" Prajapati told them. And the two of them left with contented hearts.
8.8.4 Seeing the two depart, Prajapati observed: "There they go, without learning about the self (atman), without discovering the self! The side that will hold to this correspondence (upanisad), whether it is the gods or the demons, is bound to be vanquished." Now, Virocana, his heart totally content, went back to the demons and announced to them this correspondence (upanisad): "It is the body (atman) that one should extol in this world. It is the body that one should care for. When someone extols the body alone in this world, when he cares only for the body, he wins both this world and the next."
8.8.5 Therefore, even today people here say of a man who gives no gifts, has no faith, and offers no sacrifices: "What a demonic fellow!" This is, indeed, the correspondence (upanisad) that demons hold to; they perform the funerary rites for the body of a dead person with offerings of food, garments, and ornaments, for they believe that in this way they will win the next world.
8.9.1 Indra, on the other hand, even before he had reached the gods, saw this danger: "If this is the self—then, just as it becomes beautifully adorned when this body is beautifully adorned, well dressed when this body is well dressed, and spruced up when this body is spruced up, in exactly the same way it is bound to become blind when this body becomes blind, lame when this body becomes lame, and crippled when this body becomes crippled. Upon the death of the body, indeed, it, too, is bound to die. I see nothing worthwhile in this."
8.9.2 So he returned again carrying firewood in his hands. Prajapati said to him: "Maghavan, didn't you leave together with Virocana with contented hearts? So, why have you come back? What do you want?" He replied: "If this is the self—then, sir, just as it becomes beautifully adorned when this body is beautifully adorned, well dressed when this body is well dressed, and spruced up when this body is spruced up, in exactly the same way it is bound to become blind when this body becomes blind, lame when this body becomes lame, and crippled when this body becomes crippled. Upon the death of the body, indeed, it, too, is bound to die. I see nothing worthwhile in this."
8.9.3 Prajapati told him: "It is exactly as you say, Maghavan. But I will explain it to you further. Stay here for another thirty-two years." So he lived there for another thirty-two years, after which Prajapati spoke to him: