1 The source of Law is the Veda,
2 as well as the tradition and practice of those who know the Veda.
3 Transgression of the Law and violence are seen in great men.
They do not constitute precedents, however, on account of the
weakness of the men of later times (cf. A 2.13.7–9).
4 When injunctions of equal force are in conflict with each
other, there is an option.*
THE STUDENT
Time of Initiation
5 A Brahmin’s initiation shall be performed in his eighth year,
6 or, if performed with an objective in mind, in his ninth or fifth
year. 7The years are counted from conception.
8 The initiation is a second birth (A 1.1.16–18 n.). 9The teacher
is the man from whom one receives initiation 10or instruction in
the Veda.
11 A Ks
.atriya’s initiation shall be performed in his eleventh
year, and a Vais´ya’s in his twelfth.
12 In the case of a Brahmin, the time for the Sa¯vitrı ¯ does not
elapse until the sixteenth year, 13in the case of a Ks.atriya until
the twenty-second year, 14and in the case of a Vais´ya until two
years after that (see A 1.1.28 f ).
A Student’s Code of Conduct
Insignia 15Their girdles are a cord of Muñja grass, a bowstring
of Mu¯rva¯, or a cord of thread, respectively; 16and their skins are
that of a black antelope, a spotted Ruru antelope, and a billy
goat, respectively. 17The garments of all students, irrespective of
class, are made of hemp, flax, tree bark, or a woollen blanket,
18or else of raw cotton; 19some even allow dyed cotton–– 20 dyedDharmasu¯tra of Gautama
79
1.40
with tree resin for a Brahmin, 21and with madder and turmeric
for the other two, respectively.
22A Brahmin’s staff is made of wood-apple or Pala¯s´a wood,
23and those of the other two of banyan and Pı ¯lu wood, respectively. 24Alternatively, for all students, irrespective of class, the
staff may be made of any wood suitable for use in a sacrifice.
25Staffs should be undamaged, bent in the manner of a sacrificial post,* and have their barks intact. 26 They should reach the
crown of the head, the forehead, and the tip of the nose, respectively, for each class.
27Students may shave their heads completely, wear their hair
matted, or keep just the topknot matted.
Purification 28If, while holding something in his hand, he happens to become impure, he should sip water without laying it
down.*
29The cleansing of things––articles made of metal, clay,
wood, and cloth are cleaned by scrubbing, scorching, scraping,
and washing, respectively. 30 Stone, gem, shell, and mother-ofpearl are cleaned in the same way as metal; 31bone and mud, in
the same way as wood–– 32mud also by plastering; 33 and ropes,
wicker, and skin, in the same way as cloth. 34Articles that have
become extremely unclean, on the other hand, should be thrown
away.
35He should commence his personal purification facing either
the east or the north. 36Seated on a clean spot, placing his right
arm between his knees, and wearing his upper garment over his
left shoulder and under his right arm (A 1.6.18 n.), he should
wash both his hands up to the wrists. Then, he should silently sip
three or four times an amount of water sufficient to reach his
heart (A 1.16.2 n.), wipe his lips twice, sprinkle water on his feet,
rub water on the cavities of his head,* and place his hand on the
crown of his head. 37After sleeping, eating, and sneezing, he
should sip water over again.
38Bits of food sticking between the teeth are like the teeth
themselves, unless they are touched with the tongue 39or, according to some, until they get detached.
40 When they get detached, a person shouldDharmasu¯tras
80
1.40
know that he is cleansed of them by simply
swallowing, just like saliva.
41Saliva spattering from the mouth does not make a man impure
unless it falls on his body.
42 In the case of filthy substances, purification consists in
removing their stains and smell 43by washing first with water
and then with earth and water,* 44which is done also when urine,
excrement, or semen falls on a person, or when one is stained
with the remnants of food.
45 In cases covered by vedic rules, purification is carried out in
the manner prescribed in the Veda.*
Rules of Study 46Clasping the teacher’s left hand––excluding
the thumb––with his right, the pupil should address the teacher:
‘Teach, Sir!’ 47Focusing his eyes and mind on the teacher, 48the
pupil should touch his vital organs* with Darbha grass, 49control his breath three times for fifteen morae each, 50and sit on a
bed of grass with the tips of their blades pointing east. 51The five
Calls should begin with OM. and end with ‘Truth’.*
52 The pupil shall clasp the teacher’s feet each morning 53and
also when he begins and ends his vedic recitation. 54When he is
given permission, he should sit at the teacher’s right facing the
east or the north. 55And he should repeat after the teacher the
Sa¯vitrı ¯ verse 56when he first begins to receive instruction in
the Veda, 57while the syllable OM. should be recited also at other
times.
58 If someone passes between the teacher and the pupil, this
preparatory ceremony should be repeated. 59If a dog, a mongoose, a snake, a frog, or a cat passes between them, he should
observe a fast for three days and spend some time away from the
teacher’s house, 60whereas if it is some other animal, he should
control his breath and consume some ghee. 61He shall do the
same if he happens to recite the Veda in a cemetery