@text=Bāṇacarita
@digitized-by=http://www.columbia.edu/itc/mealac/pritchett/00litlinks/harshacharita/
@dcs-id=462
@translator=E. B. Cowell and F. W. Thomas
@prepared-by=Oliver Hellwig
@language=English
1.22 Thus runs the tale:-- In former days the Holy One, the Most High, enthroned in his own sphere was reclining on his full-blown lotus couch surrounded by Indra and the other gods; and on a certain occasion he was holding a session, framing questions on the lore of Brahma and enjoying other blameless discussions.
1.23 As he so sate, adored of the three worlds, the Prajapatis headed by Manu, Daksa, and Caksusa, and all the great sages with the seven Risis worshipped him.
1.24 Some in chorus chanted the Rik hymns apt for psalmody;
1.25 some recited the Yajus sentences of worship;
1.26 some sang aloud the Saman strains of praise.
1.27 Others rehearsed the Mantras that reveal the ritual of the sacrifice.
1.28 And there, arising from the differences of their studies, quarrels one with another we heard among them.
1.29 Now there was a certain sage, a great ascetic, by nature excessively choleric, a son of Atri and brother of the moon, by name Durvasas, and he, while brawling with a second sage named Mandapala, being blinded by passion made a discord in singing a Saman.
1.30 At this silence fell on all the other sages through fear of a curse, while Brahma in the sport of another conversation heeded not. But the divine Sarasvati, a maiden of tender years, now doffing her girlhood and arrayed in youthful beauty, was fanning the great Father with a fly-flap held by her arm's waving tendril. Those sprays, her feet, glowed with a natural red as though flushed by furious stripes, and her steps were musical with a pair of anklets keeping time with them like two disciples intoning the Veda word by word. Her legs produced the illusion of being the pillars of the portal to the city of Love. Her left hand, like a bud, was laid in sport on the chain of her girdle, which tinkled like the murmur of love-sick kala-hamsas. Her body was made pure by a Brahmanical thread, which, hanging from the shoulder, seemed like a coil of virtues that had clung to her through dwelling in the Manasa of the wise: while her necklace, studded with many a pearl and having a brilliant central gem, suggested the path of renunciation, leading midway the sun and lined by many liberated souls. Her quivering lips glowed red as with lac from the feet of all the sciences, which had entered her mouth. In her cheek was reflected an image of Brahma's black deer-skin, as if the moon's deer were come down to hearken to her honeyed song. One eyebrow like a creeper was raised in a disdainful curve, and a stream of tears flowing from the outer corner of her eye seemed to be washing one ear soiled by the discord; while the other ear, revelling in a white full-blown Sindhuvara flower, betokened as with a gleaming smile the intoxication of knowledge. In the flowers of her ear-ornament tribes of devoted bees attended upon her like repeated Oms accompanying the Sruti. Her form was clad in a silken robe fine and spotless as the fabric of thought. In this guise, shedding on all sides the moonlight of her teeth, pure as if of the substance of speech, the goddess Sarasvati, hearing the discord, smiled.
1.31 Seeing her so smiling, ‘Wretch !’ cried the sage, ‘vain in the conceit of a grain of ill-got knowledge, dost jeer at me?’ With these words, shaking his head so that his matted locks, streaming from the broken fillet, seemed by their outpouring yellowness to flood the heavens with an issuing fire of passion; gathering a frown that darkened the chess-board of his forehead, like the presence of the god of death, and recalled the crocodile embellishments upon the faces of Yama's wives; with a red eye offering, as it were, an oblation of his blood to the goddess of pitilessness; imprisoning the gleam of his teeth, as if it were his voice flying in terror at the merciless biting of his lip; altering the tie of the black antelope skin-a scroll of cursing as it were-which was slipping from his shoulder; clasped in every limb by gods, asuras, and sages, who, reflected in his drops of sweat, seemed to have come for refuge in their alarm at the curse; with a hand whose fingers shook with an angry tremor spurning his rosary as though it were a string of syllables clinging with supplications to him; thus, having first rinsed his mouth from his earthen pitcher, he took the water of cursing.
1.32 Meanwhile the great goddess Savitri was seated in corporeal shape near to the Self-existent, wearing a robe of the silken bark of the tree of paradise and white as a mass of ambrosia foam. A shawl of lotus filament was tied in a svastika knot between her swelling bosoms. Three sectarial lines of ashes, banners of triumph, as it were, over the three worlds vanquished by ascetic force, brightened the courtyard of her forehead. Her Vaikaksyaka scarf consisted of a hermit's wrap which hung from her shoulder, white as ambrosia foam, like a Ganges stream bent to a circle by ascetic power. Her left hand held a crystal water-vessel like the lotus calyx whence Brahma arose; and her right, encircled -with a rotary and studded with rugs of shells, was raised aloft, the finger of scorn being scornfully waved as she cried :- ‘Fie on thee, sinner, prey to anger, evil of heart, reft of reason, ignorant of self, false Brahman and pretended sage, outcast, excommunicate, how comes it that, bewildered by thine own offence, thou wouldst curse the divine Sarasvati, mother of the three worlds, fit adoration for throngs of gods, asuras, sages, and mortal men?' So she spoke, and abandoning her ascetic's pillow arose, and with her the four incarnate Vedas left their cane seats in wrath, clad in bark garments and holding delicate chowries of Kuca fibres, bearing their hermit's staves, and grasping their round water-vessels like weapons. Under the guise of sweat soma juice, as it were, oozed from them: their foreheads gleamed with the pure ashes of the Agnihotra oblation: their voices echoed the sacred syllable : the quarters of the heavens were oppressed by the weight of their angrily agitated matted-locks: the daylight was darkened by the bulging of their black antelope skins flung round as they girt up their loins: and the world of Brahma vibrated with the coming and going of their passionate panting.
1.33 Whereat in vain besought to mercy by the gods, ‘O reverend sir, be merciful, she is no victim for a curse’; in vain implored by suppliant disciples, ‘Master, forgive one fault’: in vain restrained by Atri, ‘Balk not, my son, the fruit of throe asceticism’; the sage, beside himself with passion, let fall the water of that curse, crying:-‘Ill-mannered girl, I take away from thee this state of pride by knowledge won. Begone downward to the world of mortal men.’
1.34 But when Savitri would have answered , curse with curse, 'twas Sarasvati that hindered her, saying:-‘Dear friend, restrain thy wrath: even to Brahmans by birth merely, uninitiated in heart, respect is due.’
1.35 Thereupon, seeing Sarasvati thus cursed, the Lord Brahma uplifted his form, which wore the white sacrificial thread, as though his birth from the lotus had left a fibre clinging about him. With his right hand, which, as its signet ring sent up a spray of emerald rays, seemed to grasp a cluster of Kuca grass for staying a world-dissolution, he allayed the tumult of the curse; while his teeth shot out pure penetrating rays like plummet lines for the building of a coming aeon of bliss, and his voice echoed through the spheres like a drum heralding with honour the departure of Sarasvati, as in deep tones he spake:- ‘Brahman, the path thou hast followed is one not frequented by the good.
1.36 Its final goal is death.
1.37 The dust upraised by the steeds of passion in their unbridled onrush is wont to cloud the vision of such as be not masters of the senses.
1.38 How limited indeed the scope of the eye!
1.39 for ‘tis by the purified intellect that the perfected behold all things good and evil.
1.40 Nature rejects this union of piety and wrath as of water and fire.
1.41 How dost thou, leaving the light, sink in darkness! for the root of all asceticism is patience.
1.42 Skilled in discerning the faults of others, thy angry mind, like an eye inflamed, perceives not the frailty of its own passion.
1.43 How can censoriousness consort with commerce of great penances? Blind verily is that seeing man who is over-wrathful. Clouded with passion, the mind distinguishes not what should and what should not be done. First of all the wisdom of the angry man is darkened; then his frowning brow. 
1.46 The flush of passion assaults first the senses, last the eyes. 
1.47 In the beginning the store of merit dissolves away; then the oozing sweat.
1.48 The flash of dishonour flickers; then comes the trembling of the lip.
1.49 How ruinous to the world was the growth of thy matted locks and bark dress, shoots and bark as it were of the poison tree!
1.50 Like a pearl necklace, this graceless impulse of thy mind is out of harmony, surely, with thy sage's dress.
1.51 With a heart void of resignation idly like an actor dost thou wear the counterfeited semblance of an ascetic.
1.52 Nought free from taint can I detect in thee.
1.53 Even to this hour thy levity floats but on the surface of the sea of knowledge.
1.54 None of these great sages are deaf and dumb, impotent and dull of wit.
1.55 Why halt thou checked the sinless Sarasvati, when thine own heart, the haunt of angry sin, should rather have been checked?
1.56 These are the follies born of their own heedless slips whereby the undiscerning fall into reproach.’ Then to Sarasvati he spake again:-‘Dear child, be not dejected.
1.57 Savitri here shall accompany thee
1.58 and solace the pain of severance from us.
1.59 And the curse shall end when thou shah behold the lotus face of thy child.’
1.60 So much decreed, Brahma, having dismissed his court of gods, asuras, sages and mortal men, laid his hand upon the shoulder of Narada, who hastily approached, and arose for the performance of his daily rites.
1.61 Sarasvati, too, a little discomfited at the curse, letting fall upon her bosom a mingled glance of light and dark like a streak in a black antelope skin, led on by thronging bees caught, like the incarnate letters of the curse, in the incense of her fragrant sighs, her hands nerveless with sorrow at the curse, went with Savitri to her mansion, her path to the world of men being pointed out as it were by the down-bent rays of her nails. And swarms of kalahamsa of the palace, convoked by the prattle of her anklets, followed after her like the hearts of the dwellers in Brahma's world.
1.62 Meanwhile, as though to bear the tidings of Sarasvati's descent, the light-coroneted sun went down to the middle world.
1.63 Gradually waned the day, his pools all saddened by the calamity of the closing of all their lotus beds. Quickly, as though stung by the angrily bent side-glances of wine-flushed beauties, the world's sole eye, ruddy as a young monkey's mouth, lighted upon the peaks of the earth-propping hills. White were the environs of the heavenly hermitages with milky streams flowing from herds of cows with dripping udders; as though washed by the surge of the milky sea in uproar at the near rising of the moon. Let out for his evening ramble, the chowrie-crowned Airavata was dashing his tusks at will against the banks of the heavenly stream, while the sound went up of their crashing against its sides of gold. The sky displayed a rosy tint, as though smeared with lac from the feet of thousands of mistresses of the Vidyadharas gone forth to their trysts. Like the sweat of Sandhya in her delight at Siva's worship, the evening glow streamed forth of saffron hue, flushing the heavenly spaces and filled with the sunset offerings of the saints on their journey along the sky. Resplendent was the world of Brahma, where crowds of noble worshipping sages clasped a forest of hands in evening adoration; as though all the lotus beds were come to show honour to that lotus whence Brahma sprang. And loudly from the Brahmans uprose the chorus of the third libation hymn. In the temples of the seven sages the courts were all tressed with the flames of the lighted Vaitana fires; as though a camp lustration had commenced in an army devoted to Dharma. Light were the hermits from the removal of the poison taint of sin which the Aghamarsana hymn had stolen away. The sand isles of Mandakini's stream were purified by rows of ascetics seated at evening prayer, and the line of its waves was broken by the gleam of Brahma's floating hamsas. Fragrant with the scent of their own honey, the night-lotus beds, to the joy of the bees, commenced to open, like umbrellas of the water nymphs, seraglio mansions for the wives of the feathered tribes. Satisfied with their symposiums on the sweet honey of day-lotuses now languid at day's close, the flamingo swarms sank to sleep, arching their necks to be scratched by the soft fibres, and fanning the blue lotus beds with rows of flapping wings. The evening breeze, soft as the sigh of night, came making grey the river with the pollen of flowers on the bank and bearing perfume from the jasmine in the curls of the matrons of the City of Saints. Throngs of bees reclined in huts formed by the cavities of lotuses barred by the tips of filaments erect and stiff as they closed. Like clustering Kutaja buds in the forest of Siva's hair when it tosses in the dance, the star-swarms filled the sky with their clusters. About the earth the new-born darkness closed, coppery-hued from the after-effects of the twilight, coloured like the skin of a ripe date, and thick as the cloud of doomsday. Sharply piercing the mass of soft dusk, the scattered lamps peeped forth like clusters of Campak buds about the ear of the goddess of night.  Paling with the lovely effulgence of the crescent moon's rays, the eastern quarter began to narrow the dusk, like a young sandbank by Yamuna's banks when the dark water retreats as it dries. Perturbed, like the spirit of a proud beauty, by the moon's fingers clutching its tresses, the darkness, in hue like a jay's wing, a very cluster of curls belonging to the Gipsy of night, dissolved and abandoned the sky, and cast its gloom upon the pools of blossoming blue lotuses. The form of the Lord of White Splendour, now uprisen, assumed the glow of the Udaya mountain, resembling the lip of the nymph of night : and his redness was as though he were covered with blood oozing from his own deer, now slain by a stroke froze the rending paws of the lion that dwells in the caves of the valleys of Udaya's peaks. The gloom had waned, as if washed by the flow of the moonstone's ooze from the Eastern hill. Like a great ivory crocodile-mouthed conduit bearing a stream of milk trickling from the world of cows, the moon's circle had commenced to fill the ocean. At that clear evening time Savitri thus addressed Sarasvati, who, vacant in heart as it were, was lost in tearful thought:- ‘Friend, my tongue is ashamed to prate to thee, whose wisdom may instruct the three worlds.
1.64 Thou knowest already what are the ill-mannered ways of fate, unstable, heedless, like a lowborn person, even of the worthy, inconstant, not to be evaded, in no wise pleasurable.
1.65 A mere grain of undeserved humiliation, corning from an inferior, makes turbid the spirit even of the wise.
1.66 Even an atom of misfortune, when watered with ceaseless tears, like a leafless tree, puts forth a thousand shoots.
1.67 An over-delicate soul, like a Malaiti blossom, is withered by the particles of fiery pain.
1.68 Like the elephant's goad, even a slight prick of trouble, assailing the great, suffices to torment.
1.69 Moreover our native home, linked to us like a kinsman by the knotted tees of natural affection, is hard to abandon.
1.70 Separation from approved friends, dreadful as the stroke of the wood cleaving saw, leaves a fissure in the heart. But thee it befits not to be thus afflicted.
1.71 Thou surely art not the soil in which should spring up the shoots of the poison plant of pain.
1.72 Also, seeing that before and behind us like a ruler stand our past deeds, potent whether good or evil in producing their fruit, what occasion have the wise for sorrowing?
1.73 Why, pray, do these inauspicious tears defile a face which is the single lotus of auspiciousness for the three worlds?
1.74 Enough now of this:
1.75 say what part of the world thou wouldst adorn.
1.76 On what blest spot is thy heart fain to alight?
1.77 What holy bathing-places lost thou desire to grace?
1.78 In what fortunate forest seclusions wouldst thou live the ascetic's life?
1.79 Here am I ready to descend to earth, a loving friend, well-skilled to serve thee, tried in friendly offices when we played together in the dust.
1.80 Cast thyself henceforth in heart, voice and deed, seeking no other refuge, upon the author of all knowledge, the bestower of paradise, the dust of whose feet makes pure both gods and asuras, whose earring is formed of the moon's digits, even on Siva, god of gods, preceptor of the three worlds. In but a little time he will give thee release from the woe of the curse.’
1.82 To these words Sarasvati, letting fall a pearly white teardrop, replied:- ‘ Dear friend, if I go with thee, neither severance from Brahma’s world nor grief at the curse will cause me any distress :
1.83 'tis only that the happiness of serving the lotus-throned fills my heart with soft regret.
1.84 Furthermore 'tis thou who knowest the abodes where. Dharma can be followed upon earth, the means of mystic meditation, and how to practise the postures of ascetic rapture.’ So much said she ceased to speak:
1.85 and that night she spent with unclosed eyes; sleepless through agitation.
1.86 Next day as heralded by the dawn rosy as an old cock's comb, the adorable sun, the world's diadem, Mount Udaya's crest jewel, arose with a form red as with blood scattered from the mouths of his own steeds cut by the tossing clanking bit, the keeper of the goose tribes that draw Brahma's chariot sang aloud in Aparavaktra metre as he strolled along not far away: 'Wherefore trembles thine anxious glance, O nursling of pellucid Manasa as thy home? Descend, O kalahamsa,to the pond; Again shalt thou return to the abode of lotuses.'
1.87 Hearing this Sarasvati thought: ‘'Tis I, methinks, to whom he appeals.
1.88 So be it!
1.89 I must respect the sage's sentence.’ So she arose resolved to descend to the earth, and having left her attendants prostrate at the separation, parted from her kindred, and then, like one cut off from the herd, passed thrice round the four-faced god. At last, courteously turning back crowds of pursuing devotees, she set, forth accompanied by Savitri from Brahma's world.
1.90 Straight she came to the steady-flowing loud-roaring river Mandakini with milky udders downward streaming like the cow of Dharma, a very Malati wreath for the head of Siva. Thick covered were its banks with close-clinking Balakhilyas. The bark of its trees had been washed by Arundhati. The clear stars were tremulous as they crossed its high-leaping waves. Its sand-isles were bristling beds of floating sesamum seeds and water offered by ascetics. All white, where its banks with offerings to the manes let fall by Brahma when purified by bathing. Kuca-grass beds of tile seven Risis, who had slept hard by, gave token of the birth-fast for the sun's delivery from eclipse. Dappled was it with abundant flowers from the service, let fall by Saci's lord when purified by rinsing his mouth. It had garlands of Mandara, blossoms, dropped as the remains of the sacrifice from Siva's city. Scornfully had it cleft the rocks of Mandara's caves. Rippled was its surface with the cup-like bosoms of unnumbered beauties of Indra’s court. Its waters were resonant with its tumbling over myriad stones and crocodiles. Masses of the moon's ambrosial dew bestarred its banks, flowing down from the sun's Susumna ray. Grey were its sands with smoke from the fire of Dhisana. Vidyadharas, were flying in terror at its leaping over the sand lingus erected by the saints. Such was the river, the cast slough, as it were, of the sky serpent, the sportive forehead ornament of the jester of Indra's world, the bazaar street of the wares of Dharma, the shot bolt of the gate of Hell's city, the silken turban wrap of Sumeru's king, the cloth banner of Kailasa's elephant, the track of liberation, the wheel-rim of the aeon of goodness, the bride of the lord of the seven oceans. Passing along its banks Sarasvati descended to the world of mortals:
1.91 and just as she stood on the edge of the sky she spied a great river brimming with water pure, cool and sweet, a daughter of Brahma by name the Stream of Gold, but by men called Cona, the pearl necklace, as it were, of Varuna, the ambrosia cataract of the moon mountain, the ooze of the Vindhya's moon-gem, a flood of camphor sap from the Dandaka forest, the streaming loveliness of the world, the crystal couch of the sky's beauty.
1.92 At the sight her heart was taken captive by its beauty, and there upon its bank she resolved to dwell;
1.93 so she said to Savitri :- ‘Pleasant to me, friend, is the neighbourhood of this great river, which makes dull the lustre of Mandakini. Here are honeyed voices of peacocks, trees having stocks besanded with heaps of pollen, the entrancing hum of lute-like clusters of scent-intoxicated bees.
1.94 My heart prompts me to abide even here.’
1.95 So as Savitri welcomed her words, saying, ‘Thus let it be.’
1.96 She alighted with her friend upon the western bank: and for a dwelling she fixed her mind upon a certain fair creeper arbour by the shore containing a slab of stone.
1.97 Then after resting she soon arose, and having with Savitri gathered flowers for worship, bathed:
1.98 next, having in Siva's honour erected sand lingas on the sand-isles, she with deep devotion performed in full the ritual of clasping of fingers together with the Dhruva hymn and preceded by the Pancabrahma prayer; lastly after long meditation on the eight incarnate forms, earth, wind, water, sky, fire, sun moon, sacrificer, she presented the eightfold offering of flowers,
1.99 and refreshed her body with easily gathered roots and fruits and Cona water, cool and of a sweetness surpassing even ambrosia.
1.100 That day passed, she made a conch of flowers and slept on the stone floor of the creeper arbour.
1.101 On the morrow she spent night and day in the same routine.
1.102 Now as the days in this wise sped on and time passed, one morning, when the sun was risen only one watch, she heard in the northern quarter the deep clear sound of horses' neighs filling the thickets of the woods with echoes.
1.103 Her curiosity aroused she came forth, and looking abroad from the bower beheld no great distance and speeding towards her a cloud of dust grey as the leaf which contains the blossoming Ketaki flower.
1.104 In due course, as proximity gave birth to distinctness, she saw a troop of horse floating in that huge mass of dust grey as Caphara's belly, like a school of crocodiles in water. Before it ran an army of foot about a thousand strong, mostly young men, with clusters of crisp hanging hair upon their foreheads, and cheeks laughing with the bright gleam of their ear-ornaments; girt with scented jerkins spotted with a powder of black aloe wood paste; their upper garments formed into turbans: sparkling golden bracelets on their left forearms, daggers fastened in strong knots in their sashes of doubled cloth, tirelessly with bodies thin and hard from incessant exercise leaping like the deer of the winds and spurning smooth and rough ground, holes, and clumps of bushes; clubs at their sides, swords in their hands; laden with various wild flowers, fruits, roots, and leaves for worship: and making a ceaseless hubbub with cries of ‘On, on, make speed, make speed, away, away, make way in front.’
1.105 In the midst she discerned a youth in age about eighteen years, shaded by a sky-reaching umbrella, which with its half-moon, its girdling heaps of pearls, its inlay of pieces of various precious stones, and its whiteness as of shells, milk and foam, resembled the milky ocean voluntarily come to present Lakshmi. All about him was the sparkling light of his ornaments, as if the horizon of the heavens were keeping close out of passion for the sight of him. Down to his loins from his topknot hung a wreath of Malati flowers, like a pennon of beauty won by a world conquest. The red rays uprising from the ruby in his crest seemed delicate sprays carried by an invisible goddess to cleanse his travel-soiled form. His hair, wreathed in clusters of crisp curls and charmingly adorned with a coiled coronet of white Vakula buds, appeared to be swallowing up the day's contracted blaze. His forehead, all yellow as with arsenic paste, cast the glow of its beauty upon the heavens, and being clasped by its natural loveliness, seemed composed of a second portion of the moon which forms the coronet of Siva's matted locks. His wide eyes, whose glances bold in the confidence of fresh youth's commencement made nought of the whole world, appeared to create an autumn, clothing the heavens in myriad pools of opening white, blue and red lotuses. His long nose was like a river of beauty's water, flowing from beneath the moonstone of his forehead, and bridged across the stream of his long eyes. His mouth, breathing a fragrance of mangos, camphor, Kakkola-fruits, cloves, and coral trees, and resounding with a hubbub of intoxicated bee-swarms, seemed to emit a very spring together with a Nandana forest. His innocent smiles, bathing the heavens with the light of his teeth as he uplifted his face to catch the jests of his friends around him, created incessantly a kind of moonlight roaming about the sky. A dangling three-pointed ear-ornament--an emerald set between a pair of pearls big as Kadamba buds--emitted a sheen which suggested a pendant of green jasmine leaves with their flowers. His arms, decorated with painted lines of scented civet powder, resembled a pair of Kama's pennon poles with rampant crocodiles girdling their tops. His body was divided by a white Brahmanical thread, like Mandara encircled by the stream of Ganges indignant at the churning of the ocean. His breast, a broad sandbank with two shapely swelling bosoms for ruddy-geese, and with a coating of camphor powder in handfuls for dust, seemed a horizon spread out before him and kept within bounds by the length of his stout arms. His slim waist was marked off by a tight drawn lower garment of Harita green, of which one corner was gracefully set in front a little below the navel and the hem hung over the girdle behind, and which on both sides was so girt up as to display a third of his thigh. His stout thighs, glistening with a thick smearing of bright sandal, seemed to scoff at the length of Airavata's trunk, being very stone pillars for supporting the granite platform of his great chest; while his knees issued from huge 'crocodile mouths' with hard flesh accumulated by incessant exercise. His shanks were somewhat slim, as if from the fatigue of supporting the weight of his vast thighs. His feet, which hung on either side, were red as two young shoots of the tree of paradise, and the waving light of their nails formed as it were a row of chowrie ornaments for his horse. He was mounted on a great steed, swift as thought, in colour like a dark Sindhuvara flower, and with a coat as black as a golangula ape's cheeks. As it advanced its high prancing hoofs seemed to rest awhile in the air when it coiled its legs, and falling to tear lip the earth. Every moment the hard bit clanked when released by the teeth. Upon its forehead dangled rings of fine gold and the end of the bit rested against its long nose. It was adorned with tinkling trappings of gold. Close on either side with their hands grasping the saddle cloth, two attendants shook white chowries. In front chanted a bard, whose eloquence caused the hairs on the young man's cheeks to bristle with delight, as though tiny stamen filaments from his ear-wreath had become attached to them. He seemed to reveal a descent of a Kama's aeon, to produce a cosmos of moonlight, to beget an animate creation of the substance of smiles, to pave his path with devotion, to frame a day all of love, to inaugurate a kingdom of affection. He was to the eye, as it were, a collyrium of allurement, to the heart an attracting spell, to the senses a powder able to affect the healthiest; for desire a never-cloying delight, for bliss a never-failing charm; the resurrection day of Love, the elixir of youth, the unshared rule of loveliness, the triumphal pillar of shapeliness, the capital sum of grace, the fructuation of the world's good deeds, the first bud of beauty's creeper, the fruit of Prajapati's studies in creation, the glory of graciousness, the high-tide of sparkling wit.
1.106 By the young man's side, on a horse not close to any other, was a person wearing a white jerkin and a white silken turban round his head. Tall, in aspect like a pillar of molten gold, with a frame hardened in spite of advanced years by exercise, with short nails beard and hair, bald as a shell, somewhat stout, hairy-bosomed, dressed handsomely but with little display, he seemed one to teach even old age to be decorous, to add weight even to great qualities, to convert magnanimity itself to a disciple, to provide deportment itself with a monitor.
1.107 When the young man heard of that pair of divinely shaped maidens - for the footmen in the van took it all in at a glance and in astonishment made their report-his curiosity was aroused, and putting his horse to a gallop, he rode up to the bower, eager to see them.
1.108 While still at a distance, he alighted from his horse,
1.109 and staying his suite, approached respectfully on foot attended only by the second noble personage.
1.110 Greetings made, Savitri and Sarasvati duly received them with the usual hospitality of forest life, beginning with the offer of a seat of twigs and ending with presents of fruit with flowers.
1.111 They being seated, Savitri sate down, and after a not over-prolonged silence addressed herself to the second of the two, the man of advanced years:- ‘Sir, to make the first address ill becomes women, whose innate modesty is their all, more especially noble girls, innocent as woodland fawns.
1.112 Yet hearing, greedy to learn the news and emulous of the eye which has been gratified with seeing, moves me thereto.
1.113 And indeed even at first sight the good proffer confidence like a gift.
1.114 Like wine, the feeling inspired by the courtesy shown by a superior makes even the timid talkative.
1.115 In the very meek confidence easily reaches its highest point, like a string passing to the very end of a plaint bow.
1.116 Moreover, even in the profoundly wise the previously unknown masterpieces of creation visible in the world occasion astonishment;
1.117 for the beauty of this high-souled youth is beyond anything in the universe.
1.118 It is not the levity natural to young women that compels me to speak, but the exceeding grace, handmaid of high birth, that appears in this darling of heaven.
1.119 Therefore relate what hapless region has through your coming been desolated by the spreading plague of separation. What is your destination? Whose son is this young man, a second Kama humbling the pride of Siva's roar? How named the sire, rich in austerities, whose heart this youth gladdens, as the Kaustubha jewel gladdens the heart of Vishnu, with an ambrosial shower? Who was his mother, worthy of the worship of the three worlds, the parent like the morning twilight, of a great splendour? What fortunate syllables make up his name? To inquire concerning your honour also is the next proceeding of a heart compliant to curiosity.’ She having so spoken, the other courteously replied: - ‘Lady, kindly speech is a hereditary art among the noble.
1.120 Not merely your face, your heart also is moonlike, bestowing delight by words cooling like ambrosia dew.
1.121 Women like you come into the world as the native soil of nobility, nay, a greater glory, as the fine arts for forming noble characters.
1.122 Not to mention conversation, even interchange of glances with the noble is a great exaltation.
1.123 fListen then: This young man, Dadhica by name, the pride of the Bhrigu race, is the externalized life of the sainted Cyavana, - that forehead mark of the triad Bhu Bhuvas and Svar, whose invincible might paralyzed the pillar-like arm of Indra, whose lotus feet tread rudely on the couch for need by the jewelled crowns of gods and demons, and who blasted Puloman by the outpouring of his splendour.
1.124 His mother was a princess, Sukanya named, a gem among the maidens of the universe, daughter of the world-conquering Caryata, whose train is of unnumbered monarchs.
1.125 Observing her to be with child, her father took her in the birth-month from her husband's side to his own dwelling, there to bear her child.
1.126 The son borne by the princess was this young man - long life be his.
1.127 And in the king's house he in good time grew up, lotus-eyed, the delight of his kindred, like the young lord of stars.
1.128 Even when his daughter returned to her husband's house, the grandfather parted not from this cheery-faced grandson of his, a solace to the heart.
1.129 There accordingly he was trained in all the sciences and the circle of the arts.
1.130 In time, observing him to have attained to youth, his grandfather, reflecting that his father too should have the delight of gazing on his lotus face, has now prevailed upon himself to send his away to his father's presence.
1.131 But me let your highness understand to be one named Vikuksi, the least of servants, minister of the will of my auspiciously-named lord Caryata.
1.132 My master appointed me his attendant on the way to his father's feet.
1.133 Our royal house follows the rule of heredity,
1.134 and length of service produces in the great a certain kindly feeling even towards a dependant.
1.135 Unfailing indeed is the store of good feeling in the great.
1.136 ‘Some two leagues hence across the Shona is the abode of the sainted Cyavana, a forest rivalling Caitraratha and by him entitled Cyavana, an appellation derived from his own name.
1.137 That is our journey's goal.
1.138 If now this is a time for an act of grace, and your heart is void of contempt towards us, if such as we are fit recipients of favours and worthy to hear, let not this our first solicitation of curiosity meet with a repulse.
1.139 We also are fain to hear your highnesses’ story.
1.140 Your aspect in no way falls short of divinity:
1.141 but our hearts are eager to hear your lineage and names.
1.142 Say therefore what stock was made enviable by your birth.
1.143 Who is this lady near your highness, a coinherence as it were of mutually exclusive qualities?
1.144 Thus: - with the darkness of her locks close by, she has a radiance as of the sun; with the face of a lotus the eye of a fawn; wearing the brilliance of the young day, she has yet the smile of a night-lotus; the voice of a lovesick kalahamsa, yet swelling bosoms: hands soft as day-lotuses, yet hips broad as the rocks of the mountain of snow; thighs like a young elephant's trunk, yet a languid gait; she has not passed the season of girlhood, yet she has the swimming eyes of love.’
1.145 Savitri answered: - You shall hear, my lord, in good time.
1.146 Our hearts are fain to stay here many days:
1.147 and the distance is slight.
1.148 Intimacy will make all clear. 
1.149 Let my lord not forget people seen only by chance.’ After which reply she became silent.
1.150 But Dadhica, with a voice which, resembling the deep mutter of clouds laden with new rain, set the peacocks dancing in the creeper arbours, gravely said: - ‘My lord, her highness being conciliated will be gracious to us;
1.151 now let us visit my father.
1.152 Rise,
1.153 let us proceed.’
1.154 Then, the other assenting, he slowly arose, and with a bow moved away.
1.155 As he mounted his horse and departed, Sarasvati gazed for a long time after him with an eye with straight rigid lashes and pupil motionless as in a picture.
1.156 Crossing the Shona, Dadhica quickly reached the site of his father's seclusion.
1.157 But when he disappeared Sarasvati stood for a long time gazing in that direction,
1.158 and could hardly cease looking.
1.159 Then, when she had remained quiet one short moment recalling that perfection of form, her heart was filled more and more with astonishment.
1.160 Her eye longed to see him again;
1.161 and something involuntarily drew her glance in the same direction as before.
1.162 All uncommissioned her heart went away with him. Like a new spray upon a young wood-creeper, love somehow sprang up in her heart.
1.163 She passed the day as it were languid, empty, and heavy with sleep.
1.164 But when with westward inclining circle the sun's radiant form, lover of the lotus beds, sprung from the three Vedas, was nearing the west, with colour golden as a cluster of langalikas, and brilliance red as an old crane's head, while the gathering dusk shy-enveloping was befouling the firmament with a blackness like the bark of a young Tamala and slowly slowly the moon was creeping up the heavens like a swan of Mandakini, in pursuit of the tinkling anklets of the roaming mistresses of the saints, - at that hour, the very outset of night, Sarasvati, her twilight worship done, fell with languid limbs on her couch of young shoots and there remained.
1.165 Savitri also, having performed the evening ritual, in due course took to her couch of leaves at the usual hour of rest, and, drowsiness approaching, slept.
1.166 But the other, though she closed her eyes, enjoyed no sleep; her couch of leaves was deranged by repeated tossings of her limbs, and this was her thought: -
1.167 ‘Surely the world of mortals is above all worlds, since therein are born such gems, the three-worlds’ pride, laden with the company of all fine qualities.
1.168 Thus: - the moon is but a trickling drop of his face's flood of beauty:
1.169 his glances are beds of expanding lotuses, white, blue, and red:
1.170 the sparklings of his gem-like lips are forest avenues of open Bandhukas.
1.171 To that body only the disembodied Kama can add a charm.
1.172 Happy the eyes, hearts, and young beauty of those women within whose vision he comes.
1.173 In displaying him to me only for a moment my ill-deeds in former births have wrought their fruit.
1.174 What resource is open to me now?' Amid such thoughts as these drowsiness coming over her, she at length lay still awhile,
1.175 and falling asleep beheld (in a vision) that very youth with the long eyes.
1.176 Through that second dream-meeting the lord of the crocodile banner, drawing his bow to the ear, dealt her a pitiless stroke.
1.177 When she awoke thus smit by Kama's bolt, then came unrest as if to learn her condition.
1.178 Thus was it with her:- from that hour, even though unsmitten by the pollen-whitened wood-creepers, she felt a smart.
1.179 Though her eyes might not be hurt by flower-dust wafted by gentle breezes, yet she would let fall a tear.
1.180 Though not bedewed by Shona spray scattered by myriad fanning hamas’ wings, yet a moisture came upon her.
1.181 Though not borne by pairs of rocking Kadambas, yet was she agitated by the tossing waves of the sylvan lotus pools.
1.182 Though untouched by the smoke of parting sighs let fall by severed pairs of ruddy-geese, yet she wove a pallid hue.
1.183 Though unstung by the honey-making tribes, all grey with flower-dust, yet she would feverishly start.
1.184 After the lapse of some nights Vikuksi returning by the same route arrived at that place, and, having checked his attendants as before, approached with his umbrella-holder.
1.185 Sarasvati, who had observed his approach from afar, sprang joyfully up, and, gazing with straining neck like a woodland fawn, seemed to bathe the way-worn traveller with a glance that whitened the ten regions of space.
1.186 When he had accepted a seat, Savitri asked him affectionately 'My lord, is the young prince well?'
1.187 He answered, 'Quite well, your highness,
1.188 and he bears you both in remembrance:
1.189 during the past days, however, he is somewhat thin in figure,
1.190 and experiences as it were an inexplicable and causeless void.
1.191 Also there
1.192 will arrive later a lady named Malati, commissioned from him to inquire of you:
1.193 She is a sigh of the prince.'
1.194 Hearing this, Savitri once more spoke:- 'A magnanimous prince indeed to honour with his acquaintance people scarcely known to him and seen only for an instant.
1.195 His mind was, I suppose, accidentally caught by us for a moment as he passed, like a shawl by a wayside creeper.
1.196 In your lord's son true nobility is not devoid of high birth.
1.197 A listless world, truly, that it does not at any price purchase the hearts of the great so easily won to friendship.
1.198 This is a pinnacle, of nobility in the great, unattainable by others, whereby they win the whole world to their service.’
1.199 Having spent some time in general conversation Vikuksi went away in the direction of his choice.
1.200 On the morrow as the adorable jewel of day arose with his thousand rays, illimitable, in splendour, invading the starlight, veiling the darkness, eager to expand the red lotuses, Malati was seen to have crossed the Cona and to be approaching with a small retinue of attendants.
1.201 While still far away, she was looted as it were by Sarasvati's wishes in her love for Dadhica, hurried on by her eagerness, met by her longings, embraced by her yearning, welcomed into her heart, bathed in her tears of joy, anointed by her smile, fanned by her sighs, arrayed in the light of her eyes, worshipped with (the flower offering of) her lotus face, made a friend by her hopes.
1.202 So she drew near, and, alighting from her steed, saluted from a distance with bowed head:
1.203 then having been embraced by the pair she modestly sate down.
1.204 Being courteously addressed by them, she congratulated herself,
1.205 and with hands humbly laid upon her head announced the respectful greeting where with Dadhica had charged her;
1.206 and in the course of various polite conversation she won the hearts of Savitri and Sarasvati by her urbanity of demeanour and courteous address.
1.207 When noon had passed in due course, and Savitri was gone down to the Shona to bathe, Malati sent away her attendants, and approaching Sarasvati, who was lying on a couch of flowers, said meaningly to her: - 'Lady, I have something to communicate in private:
1.208 so I wish you to bestow on me the favour of a moment's attention.'
1.209 Sarasvati, suspecting a message from Dadhica, wondered what she was about to say. So concealing with a portion of her shawl of woven bark a heart which, as if the buds of curiosity were bursting forth, bristled with the rays from the nails of her left hand laid against her bosom, clinging to a neighbouring creeper (her hope of life, it seemed) which swayed with her incessant sighs, while her dangling ear-wreath suggested that her ear was running forth to listen; her blooming moonlike face flooding the world with an outpouring of beauty like a stream of passion; buoyed up by swarms of dusky bees attracted by the fragrance of her flowery couch, like embodied yearnings issuing forth blackened by the fire of Kama's flame; slowly, slowly in the fever of love's dart she arose from her couch of flowers,
1.210 and drawing nigh to her ear the Malati reflected in her cheek, as if out of shame she would say ‘Whisper it to me,’ with honeyed voice she gravely said: - 'Why do you speak thus to me, friend Malati? Who am I to grant attention as a favour? Even without asking, the charming and lovely are masters of our bodies, our lives, our all.
1.211 There is nothing that you are not to me, sister, friend, loved one, second self.
1.212 Ordain what task, small or great, this poor body may perform.
1.213 This compliant heart has no secrets from you.
1.214 Deal as you please with your slave.
1.215 Reveal, lovely lady, your meaning.'
1.216 'Lady,' the other replied, 'you do not need to be told the delightfulness of mundane things, the importunity of the army of the senses, the intoxication of youthfulness, the restlessness of the mind.
1.217 The resistless power of Kama is notorious.
1.218 Therefore meet me not, I pray, with censure.
1.219 My chatter is not due to folly, giddiness, or love of gossip.
1.220 There is nothing which great devotion to a master does not make people attempt.
1.221 From the very moment, princess, when the prince beheld you, love has been his spiritual guide, the moon his lord of life, the southern breeze his familiar, anguish has been in his secret counsels, pain the friend of his bosom, wakefulness his kinsman, yearnings his emissaries, sighs his vanguard, death his squire, disquiet his courier, fancies his aged advisers.
1.222 How am I to speak?
1.223 Should I say 'he is a match for your highness,' your heart will tell you that; 'of noble character,' that is beside the mark; 'a man of sense,' that is at variance with his state of mind; 'blessed by fortune,' that depends on you; 'constant in affection,' that implies experience; 'versed in rendering homage,' that is inappropriate to his princely rank; 'he is fain to be your slave till death,' a knave's plea; 'you shall be the mistress of his house,' a seductive tale; 'happy she who owns such a lord,' a partisan's story; 'you are his death,' an unkind saying; 'you know not worth,' a reproach; 'you have often shown him favours in dreams,' unsupported by testimony: 'he pleads for his life,' a coward's act; 'go and visit him,' a command; 'though forbidden, he is coming perforce,' mere overbearingness.
1.224 Therefore, when I have said that you are beyond the reach of words, the decision rests with you.' So much said, she became silent.
1.225 But Sarasvati with eyes wide-open with love replied: - ‘I am unable to say many words.
1.226 Here am I, lady of smiling speech, at your orders.
1.227 Take charge of my life.’
1.228 ‘Your commands are the highest of favours,’ replied Malati, beside herself with joy, and bowing passed on her galloping steed across the Cona,
1.229 and proceeded to Cyavana's hermitage to bring Dadhica.
1.230 But the other out of love for her friend made Savitri also acquainted with the news.
1.231 Her mind panting under its load of longing, she could scarcely pass the rest of the day which seemed an aeon.
1.232 But when the adorable sun had sunk with all his radiance in the west, when the dusk was stilly descending, and the moon was issuing, like a lion from his cave, from the eastern quarter now gleaming as with a smile, then Sarasvati sate herself down on the Shona sands, white, delicate as China silk, rolling in waves, like a silken soft bed. On her brow was a jewel, the imaged moonlight, as it were, of Dadhica's toe-nails as in her dreams she fell in supplication at his feet. Reflected in the mirror of her cheek, the moon thus near to her ear seemed to be communicating Kama's charge, `Fair smiling one, here have I brought thy heart's darling.' As her hand fanned her moist cheek, its nails scattered a horizon of rays, like a bundle of moon-digits converted into a yak-tail fan. Above her heart, sighing against her bosom, she had just strength to bear a young lotus stalk, like a rod let fall in sport by Kama across its portal to say 'Here none but Dadhica may enter.' Thus did she expect him, and this was the thought in her heart, ‘Since I, even I, Sarasvati, have been enslaved, like a low-caste woman, by this heart's son Kama,
1.233 what is to be expected of other poor excitable maidens?'
1.234 With Malati Dadhica came bringing sweet perfumes like the month of honey, bearing like hamsa cooling lotus fibers, his face uplifted in deep joy like a peacock at a cloud, causing like the Malaya breeze a tremour upon a creeper-like form all white with moist sandal: drawn on, as it seemed, by the lord of planets with finger-like rays grasping his locks; wafted by the southern breeze potent in kindling love; borne on the billowy current of desire. A throng of bees crowding towards his fragrance arrayed his willowy form as with a dark garment: the moon's image, gleaming within like the ear-shelf of love's raging elephant, whitened the convex of his cheek as with the coy aimless smile of a first union.
1.235 Having arrived and greeted her with a voice which, broken like a hamsa's, seemed interrupted by a tinkle of anklets from the loved one taken to his heart, he spent that fair night in the fashion enjoined by Kama, taught by youth, dictated by passion, and revealed by insight.
1.236 Taking confidence, Sarasvati made herself known to him,
1.237 and with her he spent a full year brief as a single day.
1.238 Then by ordinance of destiny Sarasvati conceived,
1.239 and bare in good time a son graced by all auspicious signs.
1.240 Upon him at the very hour of his birth she laid this blessing, `By my favour all the Vedas with the mystic portions, all authoritative books, and all arts shall be fully and spontaneously manifested in him.'
1.241 Then bearing Dadhica in her heart as though to display him with the vaunt of an ideal spouse, she ascended by the Great Father's will with Savitri to Brahma's world.
1.242 She having departed, Dadhica also, pierced to the heart as by a lightning flash, went away sick with his loss to the woods to live as an ascetic: having appointed as his son's foster-mother a hermit's daughter named Aksamala, wife to Bhratri, a Brahman of the Bhrigu race.
1.243 She had borne a son at the very hour when Sarasvati gave birth to hers.
1.244 So the two children gradually grew up together, fed without favour at the same breast.
1.245 The one was named Sarasvata simply, the other's name was Vatsa.
1.246 And between the two there existed an enviable affection like that of brothers.
1.247 Now Sarasvata, who through his mother's power was at the very outset of youth gifted with the full treasure of the sciences, conveyed it undiminished in the form of words to his dear confidant and loving twin-brother Vatsa.
1.248 When Vatsa took a wife, he made for him in that same neighbourhood a mansion endearingly named The Pinnacle of Delights:
1.249 he himself, assuming the hermit's staff, black antelope skin, bark dress, rosary, girdle, and matted locks, went to join his father, the ascetic.
1.250 From Vatsa there proceeded a prolific stock like Ganges purifying, noised abroad through the growing fame of the school established by its founders, upheld on the Almighty's head, deep in the lore of all arts, honoured of great saints, potent to shake its foes, stretching far over the earth's surface, stumbling not in its going.
1.251 Wherefrom were born home-dwelling sages named Vatsyayanas, devoted to Shrauta lore yet assuming not the false muttering of cranes, vowed to the 'Cock' rules of fasting yet free from the ways of cats, averse to worldly pretence, bare of all wily, deceitful, guileful or boastful intent, discarding hypocrisy, trampling on dishonesty, tranquil in nature, free from sudden change, reluctant in heart to reprove others, cleansed from darkness by detachment from the three colours, shaken clear of desire by deep thought, wavering not in soul, devoted to their followers, at rest from all the doubts of different schools, openers of all knotty points in the sense of books, poets, eloquent, without envy, fond of charming speech, skilled in clever wit, versed in urbane ways, connoisseurs of dance, song and music, never surfeited with tradition, compassionate, pure through truth, honoured of the good, with hearts melting with a dew of tenderness to all beings; likewise endowed with all qualities yet unconquered by the quality of passion, possessed of patience, cheering their dependents, not cruel, girt with knowledge, not dull, masters of arts, free from faults, helpful, no inflaming others yet suns of brilliance, without heat yet sacrificers, without crooked ways, happy, no rigid Stoics, yet abodes of good deeds rewarded, unfailing in the performance of sacrifice, dexterous, guileless, superior to desire, preeminent among the twice born.
1.252 Now as this stock persisted mid the flux of things, the passing of aeons, the descent of the Kali age, the going of the years, the march of the days, and the lapse of time, there was in due time born in the expansive Vatsyayana clan, pressing on in unbroken succession, a certain twice-born man, Kuvera by name, devoted as the son of Vinata to his guru.
1.253 He begat four sons Acyuta, Icana, Hara, and Pacupata, propagating their race, like the four aeons, through the power of Vedic knowledge, like Narayana's columnar arms gladdening the circles of the good.
1.254 Among them Pacupata begat a single high-souled son, by name Arthapati, crest jewel of all the Brahman schools, profound as the four oceans, and like a mountain keeping steadfast the law of his race.
1.255 From him were born eleven pure sons, like the Rudras, with faces coated with a dew of the moon's ambrosia; and their names were Bhrigu, Hamsa, Cuci, Kavi, Mahidatta, Dharma, Jatavedas, Citrabhanu, Tryaksa, Ahidatta, and Vicvarupa.
1.256 Of whom Citrabhanu was blessed with a son Bana by a Brahmani woman named Rajadevi.
1.257 The boy, while still a child, was deprived of his mother, who was taken away through the will of sovereign destiny.
1.258 His father, however, conceiving a deep love for him acted a mother's part,
1.259 and under his care the boy grew with ever increasing vigour in his own home.
1.260 But when, being now about fourteen years of age, he had passed through initiation and the associated rites, and had returned from his teacher's house, his father also, having performed in full the sacred duties proper to the twice-born as enjoined in Sruti and Smriti, departed ere he reached the allotted span to his rest.
1.261 After his father's decease Bana in the anguish of a great sorrow, his heart all aflame by day and night, passed some days, he knew not how, in his own house.
1.262 When his sorrow gradually became less absorbing, he through indulgence in sundry youthful follies, due either to misconduct arising from independence, to the impetuosity prevalent in youth, or to the aversion of young manhood to steadiness, came into reproach.
1.263 He had friends and companions of his own years,
1.264 and among them
1.265 two brothers of low birth, Candrasena and Matrisena, a dear friend the vernacular poet Icana, adherents Rudra and Narayana, preceptors Varavana and Vasavana, a descriptive poet Venibharata, a Prakrit poet the young noble Vayuvikara, two panegyrists Anangavana and Sricivana, an ascetic widow, Cakravakika, a snake-doctor Mayuraka, a betel-bearer Candaka, a young physician Mandaraka, a reader Sudristi, a goldsmith Camikara, a supervisor Sindhusena, a scribe Govindaka, a painter Viravarman, a modeller Kumaradatta, a drummer Jimuta, two singers Somila and Grahaditya, a maid Kurangika, two pipers Madhukara and Paravata, a music-teacher Darduraka, a shampooer Keralika, a dancer Tandavika, a dicer Ākhandala, a gamester Bhimaka, a young actor Cikhandaka, a dancing girl Harinika, a Paracara mendicant Sumati, a Jain monk Viradeva, a story-teller Jayasena, a Saiva devotee Vakraghona, a magician Karala, a treasure-seeker Lohitaksa, an assayer Vihangama, a potter Damodara, a juggler Cakoraksa, a Brahman mendicant Tamracuda.
1.266 With these and others for his companions, pliant from youthfulness, smit with a passion for seeing other lands, despite the wealth sufficient for a Brahman amassed by his father and grandfather, despite his hitherto uninterrupted pursuit of knowledge, he went forth from his home;
1.267 and, being free from all restraint and seeming bewitched by early youth. through a headstrong will, he brought himself into the derision of the great.
1.268 But gradually thereafter by observation of great courts charming the mind with their noble routine, by paying his respects to the schools of the wise brilliant with blameless knowledge, by attendance at the risen assemblies of able men deep in priceless discussions, by plunging into the circles of clever men dowered with profound natural wisdom, he regained the sage attitude of mind customary among his race.
1.269 After long years he returned once more to his own native soil, resort of Brahmans, shelter of the Vatsyayana line. There, welcomed, like a feast-day, by kinsmen respectfully announcing their relationship and renewing after long absence their kindly affection, he found himself in the midst of the friends of his youth enjoying almost the bliss of liberation.


2.1 It is with a king of profound wisdom for those who have no means of access to him as it is with a well for those who have no way of descending into it, - virtuous royal intercessors, secure the desired success;
2.2 the day plants within the susceptible lotus the beauty given by the sun; to help others, without regarding their virtues or faults, is the passion of the good.
2.3 There Bana roamed about happily in the homes of his kindred seen after a long absence, - resonant as they were with the noise of continual recitation, - filled with young students attracted by the sacrifices, running about like so many fires with their long tawny braids of hair, and their foreheads white with sectorial marks made of ashes, - with the terraces in front of the doors green with little beds of soma plants all fresh from recent watering, - with the rice and panicum for the sacrificial cakes laid out to dry, scattered on the skins of the black antelope, - with the ablations of wild rice strewed by the young maidens, - with the fuel, leaves, and bundles of green Kusha grass brought by hundreds of pure disciples, - filled with heaps of cow-dung and fuel - with the covered terraces in their courts marked by the round hoofs of the cows as they came in for the daily offerings, dropping the milk which was to be used for preparing the curds, - with troops of ascetics busied in pounding the clay for making pots, - with the sacred limits purified by heaps of udumbara branches bought to make pegs to mark out the altars for the three sacrificial fires, - with the ground white with lines of offerings to the Vishve Devah, - with the sprays of the trees in the courts grey with the smoke of the oblations, - with the wanton calves sporting about, caressed by the young cowherds, - with the succession of animal sacrifices clearly suggested by the young spotted goats playing about, - all peaceful through the cessation of the labours of the Brahman teachers, while busy repetitions were now commenced by the parrots and mainas, - like so many hermitages for the incarnate Three Vedas.
2.4 While he stayed there, Time in his character of Summer, with his smile white with the jasmines in full flower, yawned and swallowed up the two flowery months.
2.5 At first he was gentle and showed compassion to the thirsty young gardens, as if they were the young children left behind by the spring when it was conquered and had passed away;
2.6 and at its first rising by its warmth the hot season unloosed all the imprisoned blossoms throughout the earth.
2.7 The tresses of the fair [damp after bathing] were seized by the god of love as if they were chowries used at the coronation of the Spring, the King of Seasons [and so still wet with the waters of installation]; and the Sun made his expedition against the North as if in wrath for the lotus beds which the winter frosts had burned.
2.8 As the forehead-burning sun grew hot, the moons of the women's foreheads undertook vows of paying homage to him, being decorated with sandal-lines on their foreheads as sectarial marks, and wearing their curls as the ragged garments of ascetics, and bearing rosaries with the pearly drops of perspiration for beads.
2.9 The women themselves slept away the day, grey with sandal-wood applications, like the night-lotuses unable to bear the sight of the sun;
2.10 their eyes, heavy with sleep, could not bear the light of their jewels, far less the cruel sunshine.
2.11 In the sultry season the moon-light nights grew less and less, like the rivers, which cheered by the diminishing distance the parted pairs of cakravakas on their banks.
2.12 The fierce heat of the sun made people long not only to drink water perfumed with the strong scent of the trumpet-flower, but even to drink up the very wind.
2.13 But as the season's childhood passed away and the sun's rays became hotter, the lakes grew dry, the streams sank lower, the waterfalls ebbed away, the din of the crickets increased, every thing was deafened by the continued cooing of the distressed doves. Then the other birds grew audacious, the wind swept away the refuse, the shrubs grew less dense, the hard clusters of the grislea tomentosa were licked by the young lions in their blind thirst for blood, the sides of the mountains were wet with the water spouted from the fainting elephant-herds, and the bees were dumb, as they lay in the dark patches of the dried ichor of the heat-distressed elephants. The season appeared with its borders painted red with the blushing Mandara flowers, while the splitting crystal rocks were marked by the horns of the buffaloes as they were bewildered in the doubt whether what they saw was a flowing stream of water, - the dry creepers rustled in the sultry heat, the scratching wild cocks were frightened at the straw-conflagrations in the heated dust, the porcupines took shelter in their holes, while the pools were dried down to their muddy bottoms which were discoloured by the fishes as they lay rolling on their backs, disturbed by the troops of ospreys hovering in the arjuna trees on the banks; and the world lighted its forest conflagrations like a solemn lustration ceremony, and the nights fell into a consumption as the days lengthened. The winds raged madly, leaping up in every direction in the waste places and openly carrying off masses of the roofs of the watering-sheds, - rubbing against the rough stony places as if they were itching with the irritating prickings of the ripe stinging bushes of Mucuna pruritus - gathering a material outline and scattering powder as they went, and bearing the sharp shoots of the mucukunda as their teeth, - moistened by the drops in the mouths of the noisy flying grasshoppers, - plunging into the false waters of the mirage as it trembled as with waves in the heat of the young sun, - hurrying through the desolate tracks rustling with the dry shami-trees, - actors in the wild miracle-play with its passionate circular dances, and the uproar of the hurrying hither and thither of the dust whirlwinds, -  blackened with the ashes of the sites of old forest conflagrations and gathering up the scattered peacocks' feathers as if they had learned the ways of wandering mendicants, - carrying bunches of the rattling dry seeds of old karanja trees as if they had marching drums, - bursting out with the panting snorts of the buffaloes faint with the heat, -  followed as by their children by the long lines of swift deer springing up, - frowning with their curls of smoke-like chaff, rising as from burning threshing-floors, - spreading the waves of hell by their hot mists, - shaggy as with hair by the threads of the bursting silk-cotton pods, - covered with dry leaves as with a cutaneous eruption, - bearing the long lines of grass like a sick man's exposed veins, - shaking the points of the barley-awns as if they were a beard, - taking the shed quills of the porcupines for their teeth, and the flames of fire for their tongues, - whirling up the snakes' cast-off skins as their crests, - practising on the hot lotus-juices as a preparation for the future task of swallowing the liquids of the whole world, - alarming the three worlds by the shrill sound of rattling the dry bamboo-thickets as if they were the drums to proclaim the imminent drying up of the entire watery element. Their path was variegated with the scattered feathers of the darting blue jays, - they seemed coloured by the live coals and sparks of the bursting red gunja-berries, as if they had caught the varied hues from the scorching torch of the sun's rays; waking up as they wandered the wild sounds of the mountain caves, - skilled in preparing a magic potion to reduce the world to dust, - propitiating the forest-fires with showers of the coral-tree's flowers as with offerings of blood, - with their course bestarred with burning sand, and bedewed with melted bitumen from the heated rocks; and scented, as they blew, with the strong smell of the insects in the hollows of the trees, which were baked in the fragments of the sparrows' eggs which had exploded as they grew hot in the forest-conflagration.
2.14 Dreadful forest-conflagrations appeared on every side, - raging as if fanned to fury by a thousand bellows, like exhalations blowing from the cavern-like jaws of old dragons, - sometimes like deer quietly eating up the grass at their will, - sometimes like tawny-coloured ichneumons creeping in the holes at the bottom of the trees, - sometimes like followers of the Muni Kapila, wearing matted locks, - sometimes like hawks destroying the nests of the birds, - sometimes like women's lower lips red with melted lac, - sometimes like arrows, gaining their speed by the wings of the birds which they have overtaken, - sometimes like those who attain nirvana, burning up all the causes which produced them, - sometimes like lovers, veiled in garments scented with flowers, - sometimes as if languid with indigestion, heavy with fumes, - sometimes with an insatiable craving desiring to devour the whole world, - sometimes like very old men, leaning on the top of a bamboo, - sometimes like a consumptive patient, indulging in a long course of bitumen, - sometimes fat as feasting on every kind of food - sometimes burning fragrant gums like the worshippers of Rudra, - sometimes standing on the bare stems, with the thorny madana trees burned entirely, roots and branches and flowers, - actors in the wild dance with their quivering flame-locks outspread, - worshipping the Sun with their opened flame-hands, which shower down the dry bursting grains of parched wild-rice and make a way through the dried tanks, - longing without disgust for the smell of the raw flesh of the fullgrown tortoises as they are suddenly offered up as in sacrifice, and consuming even their own smoke lest it should rise up and become clouds - with quantities of massed insects crackling in the dry grass like oblations of mustard seed, - with the white shells in the dried lakes breaking into pieces through the heat like the skins of leprous patients; - raining beeswax in the woods from the bee-hives full of melting honey, as if they were covered with sweat, - with their curls of flames now all dying away in the salt was if they were bald, - and again, swallowing apparently mouthfuls of rocks amidst crags which seemed built up of the fragments of the blazing sun-crystals.
2.15 One day during that terrible hot season as he was in his house, after having eaten the afternoon meal, Candrasena, his half-brother by a Shudra mother, entered, saying, - "A renowned courier is waiting at the door, sent to you by Krishna, the brother of Shiharsa, the king of kings, the lord of the four oceans, whose toenails are burnished by the crest gems of all other monarchs, the leader of all emperors."
2.16 He replied, "Introduce him without delay."
2.17 Then he beheld the messenger entering as he was brought before him, - his legs tired and heavy with the long journey, with his tunic girt up tightly by a mud-stained strip of cloth, the knot hanging loose and fastened up by a ragged clout swinging behind him, and having his head wrapped with a bundle of letters, which had a deep division pressed into it by a very thick thread that bound it;
2.18 and he said to him, while he was yet some way off, "Is all well with my honoured friend Krishna, who is the disinterested friend of all the world?"
2.19 He answered, "All is well"; and then making his obeisance he sat down at some distance
2.20 and said, after resting awhile, "This letter has been sent by our honoured lord," and he unloosed it and gave it.
2.21 Bana took it respectfully and read it to himself. "'When they have once learned the news from Mekhalaka, the wise will avoid all delay as hindering success"; this is the real essence of the writing,
2.22 - all else is mere rhetorical compliment.'
2.23 Having mastered the contents of the letter and sent away his attendants, he asked for the message. Mekhalaka replied, "My lord thus addresses thee in thy wisdom, 'Your honour knows that the belonging to one gotra, or to one caste, or the being brought up together or the dwelling in one place or the constantly seeing each other, or the hearing of each other's mutual affection, or the conferring of benefits when absent, or a similarity of disposition can all be causes of affection; but without any cause my heart is tenderly affected with a firm love towards thee, even though thou art not seen by me and as though thou wert a relation near at hand when thou art really afar off, just as the moon feels towards the lotus-bed, however distant it may be. In thy absence the king was on various occasions prejudiced against thee by the malevolent; but it was not a true report. There are none so situated, but, even if they are good, they will have friends, neutrals, and enemies. Some unworthy remark was uttered concerning thee by some envious wretch through thy mind being not wholly averse to the levity of childhood, and others caught it up and repeated it. The minds of the unreflecting toss a-bout, rolling to and fro like water. What now shall the lord of the earth do, when he comes to a settled decision after hearing many different suggestions? Though thou wast far away, yet thou, wast immediately represented by us who sought to know the real truth. The sovereign had been reminded regard to thee that 'every one's youth in the opening of life is usually guilty of some levities,' and he at once assented to the excuse. Therefore your highness must repair to the palace without delay.  I cannot approve of thy habits, living as thou dost away from the king amidst thine own friends like a tree without fruit away from the sun's beams. Nor shouldst thou shrink from the toil of court-attendance or feel any fear of waiting upon him; for although it may be true enough, 'Alas ! he who is unskilled in waiting upon a king is like Kama, - he cannot speak out his request, although the opportunity is come exactly as he had wished, - he gives pain (to his patron) by hundreds of ill-timed petitions for favours, - and by his folly he throws away his livelihood in a moment;' - yet these other common kings are one thing, and our ambrosial lord is quite another, who puts to shame such ancient heroes as Nriga, Nala, Nisadha, Nabusa, Ambarisa, Dasharatha, Dilipa, Nabhaga, Bharata, Bhagiratha, and Yayati. His eyes are not stained by the deadly poison of pride; his voice is not choked by the convulsive effects of the baneful drug of conceit; his postures do not lose their natural dignity through any sudden epileptic fit of forgetfulness caused by the heat of arrogance; his changes of feeling are not exaggerated by the fevered outbursts of ungovernable self-will; his gait is not agitated by the unnatural movements of an access of self-conceit; his voice is not rendered harsh by the words being uttered under a tetanus of hauteur which distorts his lips. Thus his idea of jewels attaches to men of pure virtues, not to bits of rock, - his taste delights in pearl-like qualities, not in heaps of ornaments, - his judgement as to proper means is versed in deeds of bounty, not in the ichor-flowing temples of poor worms of elephants, - his highest love is for preeminent glory, not for the withering stubble of this life, - his magnificence is devoted to adorning the different quarters of the earth whose tribute he seizes, not the dolls which he calls his wives, - his notion of bosom friendship belongs to his well-strung bow, not to the courtiers who live on the crumbs of his board. His natural instinct is to help his friends, sovereignty means to him helping his dependents, learning at once suggests helping the learned and success helping his kinsfolk, power means helping the unfortunate and wealth helping the brahmans; his heart's main occupation is to remember benefits and his life's sole employment is to assist virtue, his body's one use is to carry out the dictates of courage, and the earth's to be an arena for his sword, attendant kings are wanted to amuse him, and enemies to help his majesty to shew itself. It could have been by no common merits in former births that he attained this glorious preeminence so that the shadow of his feet diffuses an all-excelling ambrosia of happiness round him."

        Having heard this, he said to Candrasena, "Refresh the messenger with food and clothing, and then let him rest". When he was gone and the day had come to a close, and the afternoon sunshine, crimson like a young crow's beak, was fading away as if drunk up by the cups of the closely joined red lotuses, and when the sun, as the speed of his horses was relaxed, - pale-pink like a garland of China roses, - seemed to limp as if he stumbled on the western mountain, as though his feet had been pierced by the (fancied) thorns of the lotus-beds, - he offered his evening prayers and retired to his couch, as the early night was hurrying on in the east, her long locks of scattered darkness seeming to hang dangling in the air, and her face as it were dark with sorrow for the moon's absence. He pondered by himself, "What shall I do? I have indeed been misunderstood by the king, and this advice has been given by my disinterested kinsman Krishna; but all service is hateful, and attendance is full of evils, and a court is full of dangers. My ancestors never had any love for it, I have no hereditary connection with it, - nor is mine the consideration from remembering former benefits, nor the affection caused by service rendered when a child, nor family dignity, nor the kindness of old acquaintance, nor the allurement of mutually imparting information, nor the desire of more knowledge, nor the respect paid to one's fine appearance, nor practice in all the turns of voice fit for inferiors, nor the cleverness needed in the circles of the learned, nor the skill to win friends by the expenditure of wealth, nor long intercourse with royal favourites. Still I must certainly go. Purarati, the venerable guru of the world, will do everything that is proper when I am away." Thus having considered, he made tip his mind for the journey.

        The next day, having risen and bathed betimes, and put on a dress of white silk and seized his rosary and repeatedly recited the hymns and sacred texts fit for one starting on a journey, - after washing the image with milk, he offered worship to Shiva, with lighted lamps, ointments, oblations, banners, perfumes, incense and sweet flowers. Then, having offered a libation with profound reverence to the holy fire, whose right flame was kindled by a profuse pouring of ghi, and whose fiery crest was noisily crackling with the splitting husks of the restless mustard seeds, which had been previously offered, he distributed wealth according to his means to the brahmans, and walked solemnly round a sacred cow which faced the east, himself decked with white unguents, and wearing white garlands and white garments, and having his ears adorned with giri-karnika flowers, fastened with the ends of durva-grass, and covered with yellow rocana-paint, - and having white mustard put on his topknot. All the rites necessary at starting on a journey were performed for him as by a mother by his father's younger sister Malati, clad in white garments and with her heart overflowing with tenderness, as if she were the impersonate goddess Sarasvati; he was greeted with blessings by the aged women of the family, applauded by the old female attendants, dismissed with good wishes by the, gurus whose feet he worshipped, kissed on the head by the elders whom he himself saluted, while the birds by their omens increased his eagerness for starting and the astrologers wished their utmost to secure favourable constellations. So in a favourable moment, - looking upon a full water-jar that was set in the court-yard which was daubed with brown cow-dung, - with a mango-spray placed on its month, itself white with five finger-breadths of flour, and with its neck encircled by a garland of white flowers; - having paid his homage to the family deities and being followed by his own brahmans with their hands holding flowers and fruits and muttering the apratiratha hymn, - he went out from the village of Pritikuta, setting his right foot first.

        On the first day, having slowly passed through a grove sacred to Candika which was parched and waterless from the hot season, and ugly with leafless trees, - with figures of the goddess carved on the trees at the entrance, which received the homage of passing travellers, - though dried up, yet seeming to be sprouting with the thousands of red tongues which hung lolling from the months of the thirsty wild beasts, - all astir with the swarms of bees flying out of the masses of honeycomb as they were licked by the monkeys and bears, - and bristling with the hundreds of new shoots of stout asparagus which had sprung up luxuriantly from the burned soil, - he arrived at last at the village Mallakuta. There he stayed happily, hospitably received by his brother and his friend Jagatpati who was just like his own heart. The next day, having crossed the holy Bhagirathi, he passed the night in a forest-village named Yastigrahaka, and the next be arrived at the royal camp, which was pitched near Manitara along the Ajiravati river; and he stopped near the royal residence.

        Having bathed and eaten his meal and rested, when only one watch of three hours remained of the day, and when the king had dined, he proceeded leisurely with Mekhalaka to the royal gate, one by one observing the many camps of the renowned subject kings. Here the royal gate was all dark with crowds of elephants, - some brought to carry turbans of honour, others to bear drums, some newly bound, others acquired as tribute or as presents, some sent by the rangers of the elephants' district, or brought in the excitement of a first visit to the court or sent at the time of an embassy or presented by the lord of a wild settlement or demanded for the spectacle of a mimic battle, or given or taken by force, or let loose, or set ready for a watch, or collected to conquer all continents like so many mountains to make a bridge over the ocean, - all gay with banners, cloths, kettledrums, conchs, chowries, and unguents, like so many ready-made festival-days for the royal ceremonies when the moon enters the asterism Pushya. The place seemed all in waves with the plunging horses as they leaped up to the sky in anger against the horses of the sun's chariot, with their chowries and ornaments serving as wings, and challenged Indra's horse to a contest by their joyous neigh, and mocked the whole race of deer as too laggard of foot, with the foam curling round the corners of their mouths like a scornful laugh, and set the Royal Prosperity herself a-dancing as the drum of the ground was struck by their ceaselessly prancing hoofs.

        In another part it was tawny with troops of camels sent or being sent as presents or brought back in return for others which had been sent, tawny like monkeys' cheeks, - like pieces of evening-glow spangled with stars, for their mouths were ornamented with lines of cowries which were like so many marks left in counting the number of leagues which they had travelled, - or like red rice-fields covered with red lotuses, for their ears were gay with red chowries; or like old karanja forests with hundreds of dry pods cracking, for they were decked with strings of ever-jingling golden ornaments; having long tufts of hair and variegated threads of wool of five colours hanging near their ears; all tawny-red as monkeys' cheeks.

        In another part it was all white with its masses of white umbrellas, like autumnal clouds white through having just emptied themselves of their water-stores, or like trees of paradise whose circles of shade are annihilated by the splendour of their masses of pearls, or like the lotuses on Narayana's navel with Garuda's (jewelled) wings resting close to them, or like tracts of the Milky Ocean with huge masses of coral shining in them, or like the surface of the serpent Shesa's hoods with large rubies sparkling upon it, or like islands in the White Ganges covered with flamingoes, - overpowering the summer-brilliance, and mocking the splendour of the sun, and drinking up the sunshine,-they turned the earth into a moon, time into a world of white lotuses, the day into moonlight, and the sky into a mass of foam, and they seemed to create a thousand moonlights out of due time and to laugh to scorn all the pomp of Indra.

        In another part it was waving with thousands of stirring chowries bright like moonbeams, which seemed to spread a firmament of white lotus-fibres, and to make an autumn in every direction with forests of kaca grass, blossoming everywhere, and to abolish the rule of the demon of ill-luck, dark as the disgrace of a coward king, and to turn the day into continual vicissitudes of going and returning by their uplifting and lowering, and seemed to steal away the world as its eight regions were seen for a moment and then lost.

        It seemed like a flock of white geese from the shell-amulets in the elephants' ears, or a forest of heavenly trees from the elephants' banners, or a grove of ruby trees from the umbrellas of peacocks' feathers, or the stream of the heavenly Ganges from the muslin dresses, or the Milky Ocean from the linen robes, or a grove of plantains from the flashing emeralds; - it created as it were a second day by the morning-rays of the rubies, and made a new sky by the sapphires, and caused an unprecedented night by the dark-violet of the mahanila stones. A thousand Yamunas seemed to be flowing from the radiance of the emeralds, while the flashes of the rubies gleamed like charcoal.

        The camp was filled on every side with conquered hostile vassal-chiefs, - some who could not find admission hung down their heads and seemed in their shame to sink into their own bodies through the reflections of their faces which fell on their toe-nails, - others seemed to present chowries in obsequious service tinder the form of the rays issuing from their nails, which were thrown back from the ground which was scratched by their bare fingers, - others with the flashing sapphires hanging on their breasts seemed to be carrying sword-blades suspended from their necks to propitiate their lord's anger; - others with their faces darkened by the swarms of bees which flocked attracted by their perfumed breath were as if they wore their beards long as in mourning for their lost prosperity, - others with circles of bees flying up round their crests as if their topknots were flying away afraid of the common mortification of paying homage, - honoured even in being conquered, and destitute of every other refuge, - continually asking the servants of the different domestic porters who at intervals made their exits and their entrances, and whose track was followed by thousands of various suppliants, - "Good sir, will it be to-day ? will the great lord give an audience in the hall after he has dined ? or will he come out into the outer court ?" and thus spending the day in the hope of an audience.

        Other kings too were there, come from the desire of seeing his glory, natives of various countries, who were waiting for the time when he would be visible. There were also seated by themselves Jains, Arhatas, Pashupatas, mendicants of the school of Paracarya, Brahman students, natives of every land, and savages from every forest that fringes the ocean-shore, and ambassadors from every foreign country. It seemed like a creation-ground where the Prajapatis practised their skill, or a fourth world made out of the choicest parts of the other three; its glory could not be described in hundreds of Mahabharatas, - it must have been put together in a thousand golden ages, and its perfection constructed with millions of svargas, and it seemed watched over by crores of tutelary royal deities.

        In his astonishment he thought to himself, "Surely such a vast multitude of living beings as this must have involved to the creating Principles a destruction of the elements or a lack of atoms or a failure of time or a cessation of vital power or an exhaustion of possible forms!" But Mekhalaka, being recognised from afar by the doorkeepers, asked him to wait a while, and himself pressed forward unrepelled and entered.

        Then in a moment he came out, followed by a tall man fair like a karnikara flower, clothed in a clean jacket, with his waist tightly bound by a girdle ornamented with a quantity of flashing rubies,-with his chest broad like a rock of Mount Himalaya, and having his shoulder rising over it like the hump of Shiva's bull, - and carrying on his breast a string of pearls like a noose to tame the whole restless race of deer, - and gleaming with two jewelled ear-rings at his ear, as if they were the sun and moon brought to be asked whether even a king of the solar or lunar race were such as our king? - while the sunbeams seemed to give place to him through respect for his office, as though they were rebuked before the stream of beauty which flowed from his face. He greeted Bana from afar with his long eye as if it were a wreath of full-blossomed lotuses taken up as an offering, - set in the very centre of stern discipline and yet, with his topknot bent down to the ground, lifting his white turban as a token of respect, and grasping in his left hand his sword, its handle rough with the pearls which thickly studded it, and in his right his burnished golden staff of office like a lightning-flash suddenly become motionless. Having come out, Mekhalaka said to him, "This is the chief of all the doorkeepers, the king's special favourite Pariyatra; let him who pursues success treat him with suitable ceremony." The doorkeeper, having come up and saluted him, addressed him respectfully in a gentle voice, "Approach and enter, his highness is willing to see you." Then Bana entered, as he directed, saying, "I am indeed happy that he thinks me worthy of this honour."

        He next beheld a stable filled with the king's favourite horses from Vanayu, Aratta, Kamboja, Bharadvaja, Sindh, and Persia, - red, dark, white, bay, chestnut, dappled like partridges, marked with the five auspicious kinds of marks, with eyes spotted with white, or marked with light yellow spots in groups like the Pleiads; with long thin jaws and short ears, and round delicate well-proportioned throats, with long upraised curved necks like sacrificial posts, with their shoulders stout and robust at the joints, their chests full and projecting, their legs thin and straight, and their round hoofs hard like masses of iron; their round bellies seemed solid, as if they had no entrails within them, lest they should be broken by their excessive swiftness, and their broad flanks were divided by a long depression, with the hairs like new shoots swaying about in the wind. They were with difficulty restrained by the ropes fixed tightly in the ground on both sides, and they seemed to grow longer as they struggled with one foot thrust out of the ropes' confinement, and the studs on their necks were ornamented with cords of many strings, - their eyes were closed, and they kept moving their mouths, which were flecked with bits of foam dark with the juice of durva grass, while the skin itched and twitched about and was bitten for a moment and then let go by the teeth. Some stood, lazily moving their tails, with one side of their loins drooping as they rested on one hoof, seeming to ponder in sleep, and slowly uttering interrupted neighs, while the ground was marked by their hoofs, whose foreparts rattled with the noise of their foot-rests as they struck upon them; others sought for food, having their longing excited by the stray morsels of fodder scattered about, while the pupils of their eyes trembled for fear at the yells of the angry Candalas who guarded them. They seemed to have a lustration-fire always near to protect them, from their bodies being yellow with a saffron unguent rubbed on them, while an awning was spread over them and the tutelary deity (Govinda) was worshipped before them. As he looked, his mind was filled with curious wonder, and he entered a little further within, and saw on his left hand an elephant-stable indistinct owing to the distance, but regaling the nostrils with an odour as of groves of vakula trees, in full bloom which diffused itself far and wide, while the stable was filled with streams of ichor covered with bees, and its outskirts were surrounded by a grove of plantain-trees, and its height seemed to crowd the very sky.

        He asked "What does the king do here?" The other replied, "This is his majesty's favourite elephant, his external heart, his very self in another birth, his vital airs gone outside from him, his friend in battle and in sport, rightly named Darpashata, a lord of elephants - this is his special pavilion." He replied, "O my friend, if he is called Darpashata and he has no faults, I may surely see this lord of elephants, - will you take me to him, for I am overcome by curiosity?" "Be it so," he answered, "draw near by all means, what harm is there in it ? have a good look at the lord of elephants."

        So he went forward in that direction, and there while he was still at a distance he saw the elephant Darpashata surrounded by the troops of cataka birds uttering their loud notes in the sky as they were excited by the deep sound issuing from his throat (which suggested clouds), and the domestic peacocks which made the ground resound with their cries, - filling the surrounding space with the spirituous scent of the ichor which rivalled the full-blown kadamba flowers, - like a rainy season out of its time wearing an embodied form, - throwing off the fourth period of life by an outburst of red spots on his skin like a lake covered with lotuses brown with thick drops of honey, - chanting as it were a tune for his auspicious entrance upon the fifth period with his shell-ornaments as they mingled with the deep sound of his flapping ears, - seeming as if for fear of bursting the earth he tried to lighten his weight by swinging his long huge body with sportive oscillations on his three feet as they kept varying in constant motion, as though he were rubbing his body against the walls of the world, - challenging the world-bearing elephants of the various regions as he threw up his trunk in defiance, and seeming to be, cleaving the pillar of the world with a saw armed with thick sharp teeth. It was as though the world could not contain him and he was striving to force a passage out, while his drivers tried to shew him every service which could alleviate the hot season, some like clouds with long-accumulated stores, hurrying up with fresh juicy shoots and creepers, others like lakes whose waters are variegated with heaps of Vallisneria plants and lotus fibres scattered on them. He threatened to block up the whole world with all its mountain-ranges, seas, continents and forests, with his huge bar of a trunk, which was all wavy with thin lines of wrinkles running round it as if they were marks to reckon up the number of past victories which he had won in battle, while it was held aloft as if he scented the ichor of some rival elephant approaching, - one of his tusks had its root wet with spray from a thick piece of plaintain covered with leaves which was enclosed in the trunk, the other seemed to have dropped its bough and was as it were all horripilated with the joy of battle from a quantity of lotus fibres which hung from it in play. He appeared to vomit whole beds of lotuses which he had eaten in his gambols in the lake, through the bright colour of the two tusks together, and spread his own glory through the four quarters of space; and he seemed to laugh to scorn the lions who vaunted their rough play with some poor scarecrows of elephants whom they had worsted, while he appropriated for himself a silken veil which might have been taken direct from the heavenly tree. When he lifted up in play his huge trunk, he seemed to drop a shower of red lotuses which he had eaten, or to vomit a quantity of fresh shoots, as he then displayed his palate which was soft to the touch like red silk. His bright tawny eyes seemed to emit a stream of honey which he had drunk up with the mouthfuls of lotuses, while his cheeks poured out under the guise of ichor a rich mixture of perfumes if he had been eating groves of the parijata tree of heaven, together with mangoes, campakas, lavalis, cloves, kakkolas, cardamoms, and sahakaras, and perfumed with abundance of camphor. He seemed to be busy, night and day, bestowing all the woods on the other elephants by royal inscriptions of donation made vocal with the swarms of bees which hummed round them as if reading them, and scratched by the half-cut branches of red sugar-cane as by a graver, and which seemed by a mistake to stay on hand instead of being dispersed abroad; he was constantly cooled by a trickling garland of ornaments cut out of the moongem in the shape of the constellations, and he carried his head high as if it had been crowned with the tiara of universal empire over all his compeers; he stood as though he were loyally fanning the Guardian deity of the royal family who lay pillowed on his tusks, with his huge ears, which, as they flapped, seemed alternately to conceal and reveal the wide world; while his tail waved like some flyflapper marked with the signs of elephant-empire and handed down through a long succession of hereditary rulers. He seemed to pour out again from his mouth the rivers which he had drunk up in his triumphal progress of conquest, in the form of the clear cold water which he spouted forth; and he displayed his sensitiveness to insult by loud trumpetings which followed various movements of his body as he heard the drums borne by other elephants, while all his limbs had been motionless for a moment as he listened attentively. He seemed to pity himself for not being in the thick of the fray, and as if ashamed of the humiliation of bearing a driver he poured out streams of ichor and scratched the ground with the tip of his trunk; his eyes were a third closed as with the languor of intoxication, when his driver shouted angrily, as he scornfully took up and dropped the mouthfuls of food, and finally took them slowly and reluctantly, while the juice issued from his mouth discoloured, like a stream of ichor, by the dark juice of the tamala boughs which he had eaten. He moved restlessly with pride, he snorted with repressed energy, he swelled with intoxication, he staggered with youth, he flowed freely with ichor, he leaped about with conscious strength, he was drunk with arrogance, he seemed to be ever seeking the highest place with ambition, he gasped with excitement, he affected all with his gracefulness, he rained influence on every side by his beauty.

        His nails were smooth, his hair was rough, - he was reverend in face but a gentle disciple in deportment; soft as to his head, but firm in his friendships; his neck was short but his life was long; he was stinted in his belly but lavishly bounteous in ichor; a very Balarama in his wild exploits, but like a highborn wife in his devotedness; a Jina in patience, a shower of fire in his storms of anger; he was Garuda in his power to lift nagas, he was Narada in his love of quarrels, a thunderbolt without rain in his sudden attacks, a Makara in his power to disturb armies, a serpent in the might of his teeth, Varuna in the noose which he held in his hand, he was Yama's net in entangling his enemies, he was Time in his buttings, Rahu in his grip, Mars in his crooked movements, a circling torch in his rapid rounds. He was to valour, a very mountain of the jewel which gives all desires; to chivalrous feeling, a palace-home with his tusks for two pillars of pearl; to magnanimity, a heavenly chariot, moving at will, and gay with ornaments, chowries, and bells; to anger, a shower-bath of scented water, dark with a constant raincloud of ichor; to ambition, a temple with a golden image within; to pride, a pleasure-hill with streams running down its sides; to arrogance, a diamond house with an arch of ivory; to royalty, a moving hill-fort with its high frontal-globes as so many towers; to the earth, an iron wall indented with thousands of arrows; to the king, a tree of heaven, resonant with hundreds of bees. Thus he was a music-hall for the dancing of his flapping ears, a drinking-saloon for the swarms of bees, a gynæceum for the display of paint and decorations, a festival of Kama for the sportive gambols of intoxication, a faultless evening for the sight of all the constellations; a rainy season out of season, for the overflowing rivers of ichor; a deceptive autumn for the perfume of the saptaparna trees, an unprecedented cold-season for the showers of dew, and a fictitious cloud for the trumpeting thunders.

        As he wondered, thinking to himself, "Surely in his creation the mountains were used up as atoms, how else could this astonishing majesty have been produced? It is indeed a marvel, - a Vindhya with tusks, the primeval Boar with a trunk!" - the doorkeeper addressed him; "See ! when his enemies, wandering in the forests, would vainly try by a hundred wishes to paint again their old glory done without leaving a rack behind, and when their minds are bewildered with devising means to express their imaginations, this lord of elephants, if he comes by chance into their recollection as they listlessly muse in despondency, cannot endure as rivals even the world-supporting elephants in the Manasa lake. - But come, you will have another opportunity of seeing him; you shall now see my lord himself!"

        On hearing these words he with an effort drew away his eyes which had fallen on the elephant's ichor-bedewed cheek and were half closed as if intoxicated with the sweet odour; and, following the path indicated by the doorkeeper, he passed through three courts crowded with subject-kings, and in the fourth he saw King Harsa, in an open space in front of a pavilion where he used to give audience after eating, surrounded at a distance by his attendants in a line, all six feet in height, fair like karnikara flowers, armed and of old families, like so many golden pillars, - with his special favourites seated near him. He was sitting on a throne made of a stone clear like a pearl, washed with sandalwood water, and bright as the moon with its feet of ivory and its surface cool to the touch like snow-water, - he rested the weight of his body on his arm which was placed on the end of the seat, and he seemed to be sporting with his subject-kings under the far-shining canopy of the brightness of his body with the rays of his jewels diffused round, as if it were in a lake delightful in the hot season, the water of which was tangled with clusters of the long soft lotus-roots; and he seemed made as it were out of the pure atoms of light. He was embraced by the goddess of the Royal Prosperity, who took him in her arms and, seizing him by all the royal marks on all his limbs, forced him, however reluctant, to mount the throne, - and this though he had taken a vow of austerity and did not swerve from his vow, hard like grasping the edge of a sword: clinging closely to duty through fear of stumbling in the uneven path of kings, and attended with all her heart by Truth who had been abandoned by all other kings, but had obtained his promise of protection, - and waited on reverentially by the reflected images of a fair handmaid standing near, which fell on his toe-nails, as if they were the ten directions of space impersonate. With his long glances which penetrated space he seemed to examine what the Regents of the different quarters had done or left undone, while the sun seemed to seek his permission to rise, as its beams rested on the back of his footstool supported by jewelled feet, - the day made its reverential march round him, while a clear space was kept in the centre, marked out by the splendour emitted from his ornaments; he burned with vexation when even the mountains did not bow before him, and so displayed the ocean of his beauty which was white like sandal-wood, boiling as it were into foam through the heat of his heroic passion, - in his isolated sovereignty feeling indignant that his own image should be repeated even in the reflections on the crest jewels of the prostrate kings round his feet, and keeping his Royal Glory continually sighing under the guise of the wind of his chowries as she sat fuming with vexed pride; he was embraced by the Goddess Shri who came to him after spoiling all the four oceans of their beauty: though he gave away thousands of rainbows from the coruscations of his ornaments and sent them as a present to Indra, yet he still in his seeming penury rained ambrosia in his interviews with other monarchs; in poetical contests he poured out a nectar of his own which he had not received from any foreign source; he ever shewed his heart in his confidential intercourse even when it was not sought; when he shewed favour, he seemed to place Glory, though herself immoveable, in various positions by his patronage; in the parleys of Heroes he seemed listening to the whispered kindly counsels of the Goddess of battles with his cheek horripilated in joy; during the recital of the past conflicts of heroes, he ever turned his eye like a shower of soft cleansing oil on the loved sword; in easy jests flashing from his bright teeth his clear meaning to the circle of kings standing awed by his majesty: abiding in the hearts of all the world and yet never leaving his own proper place; in his greatness, he was beyond the sphere of all good qualities, out of the range of ordinary successes, outside of common benefactions, beyond the possibility of blessing, out of the reach of desires, far removed from fortune, not within the scope of comparisons, out of the influence of fate, and beyond the past experience of prosperity. He displayed an avatara of all the gods united in one, as he had the lost delicate feet of Aruna, the slow-moving thighs of Buddha, the brawny forearm of the Thunderer (Indra), the shoulder of Justice, the round lip of the sun, the mild look of Avalokita, the face of the moon and the hair of Krishna. His left foot was playfully placed on a large costly footstool made of sapphires, girt round with a band of rubies, - as if it were the (dark) head of Kali the demon of the iron age, - while the surface of the ground was dyed by the rays which fell on it; like the youthful Krishna when he planted his foot on the circle of hoods of the serpent Kaliya, he dignified the earth by the spreading rays of his toe-nails, white like fine linen, as with the tiara of his chief queen. His feet were very red as with wrath at unsubmissive kings, and they shed a very bright ruby-light on the crowded crests of the prostrate monarchs, and caused a sunset of all the fierce luminaries of war and poured streams of honey from the flowers of the crest garlands of the local kings, and were never even for one moment unattended, as by the heads of slain enemies, by swarms of bees which fluttered bewildered at the sweet odour of the chaplets on the heads of all the feudal chiefs; and they formed as it were sylvan summer-houses of full-blown red lotuses for the Goddess Shri to shelter in as she acted as his shampooer, and bore signs which told of his sovereignty over the four oceans in their auspicious marks, such as the lotus, the shell, the fish and the makara. His two thighs were like two ruby pillars, set to bear the weight of the earth which rested on his heart; like two sandal-trees with their roots shining with the rays from the crest-jewels of the serpents clustered round them, or like two streams from the ocean of beauty overflowing and all covered with foam, or like two huge tusks of a world-bearing elephant, bent through being used to block up a yawning makara's mouth. He shone, like the mountain Mandara with Vasuki's skin at the churning of the ocean, with his lower garment which was radiant with shot silk-threads, washed in pure water, clinging closely to his loins, ornamented with the rays of the jewels of his girdle, and white like a mass of ambrosial foam, - while he appeared girt with his thin upper garment spangled with worked stars like the round world with its surrounding ether cloudless and fall of stars. He shone with his broad chest, like Kailasa with a cliff of crystal, - able to bear the shock of various armies, too sturdy to be confined within the limits of its garment, and made smooth in spite of its hardness by the thousands of elephants' tusks which had collided against it. His neck was encircled by a necklace of pearls like the serpent Shesa, now sleeping peacefully in the sense of relief at depositing the burden of the whole earth on his stalwart arm, or like the dividing-line which draws the boundary between the respective empires of Shri and Sarasvati over his bosom and face. His breast was wrapped in a fold of rays from the pearls in his necklace as if it were a strip of cloth put on to signify the solemn conferring as a special gift of all the property gained during one's whole life; he was like a jewel mountain, with its outstretched wings of jewels, spread on both sides, - with the red rays of the bracelets as if they were the paths for the passage of the glory produced by his arm or the continued streams of honey from the lotuses in the ears of Shri as she lay on the pillow of his arm, or as if they were other arms newly budding forth in rivalry of Vishnu's four arms. He at once destroyed the greatness of the four regions of space and their rulers by his two long arms, which were as the bolts to blockade the path through the world-encircling Lokaloka, and as the rock-walls built outside the moats of the four oceans, and as a cage of adamant to confine all illustrious kings, and as a jewelled triumphal arch for the festal entrance of the world's goddess of Victory. The redness of his lip bedewed all the regions of space like the exudation of a branch of the heavenly tree, and the lip itself seemed as if it were the Kaustubha gem, taking its place as a feature of his face in its desire to kiss its sister Laksmi who sat enthroned there. He displayed at intervals a sudden flash of illumination to the Goddess of Empire who was somewhat dull and bewildered by nature, through the gleaming flashes of his teeth as he laughed at the sportive sallies of his companions; (when he smiled) he seemed to be sending away the lotuses which had come to him in uncertainty whether it was his face or the moon - and was dismissing the autumnal moonlight which had entered under the illusion that the flash of his line of bright teeth was a bed of lotuses; and he made a new anniversary of the churning the ocean by the odour which exhaled from his mouth perfumed by the mingled scent of wine, ambrosia, and parijata flowers, which filled all the regions of space, - while the perfume of his breath was continually inhaled by his overhanging nose which rose like a bud on his expanded lotus-face. With the brightness of his milk-white eye he deluged the regions of space as with a full tide of the milky ocean at the rising of his unparalleled moon-face, - and the chowrie-woman, as reflected in his stainless cheeks, seemed to be Sarasvati who inhabited his mouth taking bodily shape; while his broad forehead was reddened by the pink hue of his crest-ornament, as if it were the lac dye of Laksmi's feet which had clung to it, when he sought by prostration to appease her jealousy at the preference shewn to Sarasvati. He was listening, like one skilled in music to lute-players, to the tribes of bees in his ear-rings, which with restless feet played a tiny lyre consisting of the end of his ear-ring jewel with the web of its rosy rays for strings; while his locks were encircled by a wreath of white jasmine flowers mimicking Durga's wreath of sculls, and serving as a halo round his moon-face, like a circle of moonlight from the nails of the Goddess of Empire, which had remained behind as she grasped his hair in amorous play. He was consecrated by the light of the pearls in his top-knot and the dark rays of the emeralds, as they crossed in their intermingling, as if the braid-like streams of the united Yamuna and Ganges had come of their own accord from Prayaga.

        His imperial splendour was however eclipsed by the women, as their foreheads became blackened by the darkness produced through the ornamental tilaka of black agallochum being melted by the drops of perspiration, as if it were a dark mark produced by their repeated prostrations at his feet to incline him to grant their coaxing requests, - propped up, as they were, by their flashing pearl-necklaces which were like so many waves rising from the tossed Manasa lake, - seeming in jealousy to rebuke Shri herself by the action of their creeper-like eyebrows, tremulous with a playful motion, - dragging him captive as with bonds by their long sweet-scented sighs which seemed made of the Malaya wind, - with their great jar-like bosoms, encircled with bands of large Vakula flowers, drawing from him every drop of contentment with his own proper spouse, - violently dragging him into their hearts, by the attraction of the rays of the trembling jewels of the necklaces which were set in motion by the trembling of their bosoms, - embracing him, as with many outstretched arms, with the rays of their far-flashing ornaments, - keeping their minds back, as it were, which had started off too impetuously, with their open hands which served as a covering over their mouths which wore an additional grace from a languid yawn, - skillfully moving their eyes which were half-closed as fainting at the arrows of Kama and had their corners contracted on account of the pollen of the flowers in their ears, shaken by the bees which flew about blinded by intoxication, - striking the lotuses in their own ears with the sidelong glances of their eyes shot from under the play of their frowns through their mutual jealousy, - carrying the king reflected in their soft cheeks, as if he had been drunk up by their eyes whose lashes were motionless with the flood of joy born of their unblinking gaze, - creating for love's assistance new moon-rises by their involuntary smiles through the playfulness of desire, - and seeming as in anger to break ever so many of Kama's useless bows in the form of the rays of the curved nails as the joints of their fingers gave a loud crack when their twined hands, as they gesticulated, came into close contact in the rapid bendings of their limbs. He lay smiling, while he languidly struck on the head with the bow of a lute the shampooing attendant, as his lotus feet dropped from her spray-like hands which were trembling in her perspiring emotion; while he taught the Goddess of Empire as well as the lute (both equally dear) while each had its kona firmly grasped in his hand. Single as he lay there, he was viewed in very different lights by different spectators, - riches called him cold, all faults turned from him as inaccessible, the senses felt awed at his love of self-control, the genius of the iron age said 'he is beyond my reach,' all vices pronounced him as passionless, dishonour looked on him as timid; Love said, 'the workings of his mind are hard to be understood'; Sarasvati complained that 'he is uxorious', other men's wives that 'he is impotent'; ascetics said that 'he is a seer of the highest order,' harlots that 'he is a deceiver'; his friends thought that 'he is easily led by others': Brahmans that 'he is our ready servant'; and his enemies' soldiers that 'he has faithful allies.' More truly the lord of Vahini than Shantanu, more illustrious for victory than Bhisma, more delighting in the bow than Drona, more unerring with the arrow than Ashvatthaman, dearer to Mitra than Karna, more forbearing than Yudhisthira, possessing the might of more elephants than Bhima, more worthy of figuring in the war of the Mahabharata than Arjuna. He was as it were the cause of the Golden Age, the source of the creation of the Gods, the native land of pride, the home of compassion, the close neighbour of Purusottama, the mine-mountain of valour, the assembly-room for all sciences to Sarasvati, an anniversary of the churning of the Ocean for ambrosia to Lakshmi, an exhibition of power to Dexterity, a common meetingplace of the proprieties, a valuation of her treasures to Beauty, final perfection to the creation of the atoms of form, an expiation of all past evil deeds to Empire, a challenge against all opposing power to Kama, a means for displaying Indra to all men as 'the city-stormer,' a visible return of ideal justice, the seraglio of the fine arts all together, the ultimate authority for defining good fortune, the final bath which completes the rites of installation to all monarchs, - the grave and gracious, the awe-inspiring and affable, at the same moment a holiday and a holy day, the universal Monarch.

        Having seen him, - feeling, as it were, at once welcomed and checked, full of desire and yet satisfied, with his face horripilated with awe, and with tears of joy falling from his eyes, he stood at a distance smiling in wonder and pondered, "This then is the Emperor Shri Harsa, that union of separate glories, - noble in birth and of well-chosen name, - the lord of the field bounded by the four oceans, - the enjoyer of all the fruits of Brahma's pillar, the world, - the surpasser of all the victories won by all the kings of ancient times. Through him the earth does indeed possess a true King! His youthful exploits, unlike Krishna's, transgress not right; his freaks of power cause no offence to the man of refinement as did those of Shiva; his boasts lead to no destruction of families as did those of Indra to that of the cowpens; unlike Yama, he is not too fond of wielding the rod of punishment; unlike Varuna, his treasure-houses are not guarded by thousands of pitiless sea-monsters; unlike Kuvera, seeking an interview with him is never fruitless; unlike Jina, the sight of him is never without solid result; unlike the Moon, his glories do not wane. Wonderful is his royalty, surpassing the gods! His liberality cannot find range enough in suppliants, nor his knowledge in doctrines to be learned; his poetical skill finds words fail, as his valour lacks opportunities to exercise it; his energy wants scope and his fame sighs for a wider horizon, his kindly nature seeks in vain more hearts to win, his virtues exhaust the powers of number, and all the fine arts are too narrow a field for his genius.

        Under this monarch are found only the cloths worn by devotees in meditation, and not forged documents; the royal figures of sculptors and not the vulgar disputes with kings; only bees quarrel in collecting dews (dues) - the only feet ever cut off are those in metre; only chessboards teach the positions of the four 'members,' there is no cutting off the four principal limbs of condemned criminals; only snakes hate Garuda the king of birds (dvija-guru), no one hates Brahmans or gurus; and the followers of the Mimamsa alone have to ponder problems in administering justice (adhikarana), while they examine the several adhikaranas or 'cases for discussion' in their system."

        So approaching, wearing the sacred thread, he uttered his good wishes.

        Then on the north not far from the royal palace the attendant on the elephant chanted this sweet couplet in the aparavaktra metre;

        "O young elephant, dismiss thy playful restlessness, follow the rules of good behaviour, with bent head; the heavy hook, crooked like a lion's claws, held aloft, does not spare thee."

        But when the king heard it and saw him, he asked, filling the sky with his voice deep like the roar of a lion in a mountain cave, "Is that Bana?" The doorkeeper replied, "As my Lord commands; it is he." "I will not see him yet, as he has not as yet offered his tribute of respect," so saying, he turned the long brilliance of his eye, whose pupil trembled as it inclined to the corner of the eye, as if he was shaking a curtain variegated across with white and dark silk, and said to his favourite, the son of the king of Malwa, who was sitting behind, "He is a thorough petit-maitre." But when the other paused for a moment in silence at this unexplained speech of the king and the courtiers were all dumb, Bana replied, "Why, my lord, do you thus address me, as if you did not know my character and did not believe me, as if you depended on others for guidance and did not understand the ways of the world yourself? The nature and talk of people will always be wilful and various; but the great ought to see things as they are. You surely will not regard me with prejudice as if I had no special claims. I am a Brahman born in the family of the Soma-drinking Vitsyayanas. Every ceremony was duly performed, as its time came, beginning with the investiture with the sacred cord; I have thoroughly studied the Veda with its six angas, and as far as I was able I have heard lectures on the shastras, and from my marriage I have been a diligent householder; what signs have I of being a petit-maitre? My youth indeed was not without those follies which are not directly inconsistent with either world, - so far I will not deny; and my heart on this point will confess a feeling of repentance. But now-a-days, when your highness, - calm in mind like Buddha himself, one who carries out all the rules for the castes and orders like Manu, and bears the rod of punishment as visibly as Yama, - governs the whole earth girdled by the seven oceans, and bearing all the continents as its garland, - who would venture without fear even to act in his own mind the character of indecorum, that bosom-friend of open profligacy? I will not dwell on human beings, - in consequence of your power even the bees drink honey in fear, even the ruddy-geese are ashamed of their too great fondness, - the very monkeys are alarmed when they play their wanton tricks, and even all the destructive animals eat flesh with compassion. Your highness will in time know me thoroughly by yourself, for it is the nature of the wise that their minds never act perversely." Having said this, he was silent.

        The king also, after simply saying, "So we have heard," was silent; but he did not welcome him with any signs of favour such as friendly conversation, inviting him to sit down, etc.; he only revealed his inward pleasure by a gracious glance which seemed to bedew him with a shower of ambrosia; and as the setting sun was verging to the west, he dismissed his courtiers and entered his private apartments. Bana also went out, and retired to his place of abode. The day was now calm and its fierce blaze soft like polished brass, and the sun, the diadem of the western mountain's crest, as he left the sky, was letting fall his rays like the sprays of the Nicula tree; the deserted cow-stations in the forests had their patches of tender grass covered with families of deer lazily ruminating; the river-banks resounded plaintively with the cooing of the melancholy female ruddy-geese; in the pleasure-groves near the house all the waterpots were being turned over to fill the basins near the trees, while the troops of chattering sparrows were sitting on the boughs which formed their home; the companies of hungry calves were drinking their mothers' flowing udders, after they had returned from wandering during the day; the sun's round goblet for drinking the evening libation of the western ocean was sinking covered with a red glow as if it were plunged into a stream of mineral veins in the western mountain; the religious mendicants were intent on worshipping the shrines, having washed their feet and hands in the outpour of their water-pots; the fire, with the sacred grass spread round it, was blazing up, with its hands purified by the sacrificial vessels; the devout sacrificers were duly offering their libations; the trees of the groves stood with their monkeys resting from all their tricks, and with the nests of the crows crowded with their inmates fast asleep; the owls, settled in their huts in the hollow trunks of old trees, were preparing to go out on an expedition; a thicker host of stars was indenting the expanse of the sky, like a quantity of water-drops scattered at the time of the evening worship by the thousand hands of the sages; the crest of night floated over the sky like a mountaineer-woman's topknot; the young avatar of evening, dark like Shiva's neck, was devouring all that remained of the daylight; the lines of the lamps shone out as if they were the ray-fingers of the sun which had entered into the earthly fire at night and had come forth to point in scorn at the darkness; the gates seemed to announce their closure by the creaking of the folding leaves; the children were beginning to long to go to sleep, having enjoyed a good lying in bed while listening to the long stories of the old nurse; the dreadful mouth of early night was beginning to yawn, with its darkness as black as ink or an old buffalo, and waking up 'the good people.' Kama with his twanging bow-string was raining a continual succession of arrows and stealing the intellect of all the world, the ladies had their loins jingling with the girdles of many woven threads tied by their tire-women, while romantic heroines started on their wanderings in the empty roads, following the guidance of love; the pleasant chatter of the geese in the ponds became rare, as it was dulled by the tinkling of the anklets of the women, and the notes of the cranes, as these grew longer as they became deeper asleep, melted the hearts of separated lovers; and a number of lamps were scattered about like the seeds beginning to shoot of the coming day.

        He reflected to himself, "King Harsa is very gracious, since he is still fond of me, though he is vexed at the rumours which have naturally spread about my many youthful follies; if I had been really under his displeasure, he would not have honoured me with an audience. He wishes me to be virtuous; for lords teach proper behaviour to their dependents even without words by granting them an appropriate reception. Shame on me, thus blinded in my mind by my own faults, and crushed by neglect, - that I venture to indulge in various fancies concerning this most excellent monarch. Verily I will endeavour so to act that he may recognise me in time in my real character."

        Having made this resolve, he went out the next day from the royal camp and remained for a while in the houses of his friends and relations, until the king of himself learned his true character and became favourably inclined to him. Then he reentered again to visit the royal abode; and in the course of a very few days he was received by his gracious majesty into the highest degree of honour springing from kindness, of affection, and of confidence, and shared with him in his wealth, his hours of unbending, and his state dignity.