Om adoration to Ganesa ! Om adoration to the Rgveda ! 


I 


1. After having paid homage to Brahma the self -existent, who protects 
the universe, and also to those who have seen the (Vedic texts and 
formulas called) mantras, I intend to teach the ancient Rgvidhanam, 
which has formerly been seen by the rsis who knew the mantras. 

2. Saunaka communicated the rules for the rites, which have been seen 
by the rsis, with regard to the mantras and to those who have seen 
them, in due order according to the redaction of the traditional 
collection of Rgvedic texts. 

3. And the various mantras which were seen by rsis, together with 
their ritual use, are described with regard to their ritual use, being 
taught under their respective headings, 

4. and rites with manifold aims, relating to atonement and (the 
obtaining of) prosperity, and the complete attainment of special 
aims founded on tapas (‘asceticism’), of a trustful man performing 
these rites. 

1. Attention may be drawn to the adj. pur ana- which often refers to ancient 
traditions and collections containing them. See, e.g., RV. 9, 99, 4; AthV. 
11, 7, 24; 15, 6, 4; CatBr. 11, 5, 6, 8; ChandUp. 7, 1, 2; 7, 1; IpDhS. 
1, 6, 19, 13; 10, 29, 7, etc.; Pet. Wtb., s.v. 

2. According to the tradition the sage Cattnaka, teacher of Asvalayana, was 
the author of the Brhaddevata (which enumerates the deity or deities to 
whom each hymn of the Rgveda is addressed), of the RV.pratisakhya (dealing 
with pronunciation, euphonic combinations etc. of the text of the Rgveda), 
Anukramanis (indices giving the name and family of the rsi who saw the 
'hymns’, the number of verses, names of metres etc.), and the Rgvidhana. 
Most of the work attributed to him (to which also belongs the vulgate 
recension of the Atharvaveda) is, however, probably the production of his 
school. See also A. A. Macdonell, The Brhad-devata, p. XXIII f. The words 
samainnaycinupurz’asah “in the sequence of the traditional text’’ occur also 
in the BD. 1, 1. — rsis: the mantras were revealed to the ancient seers. 



11 


5. The modifications, which are stated, such as praise, and the 
declaration of the purposes relative to the stanzas and the ‘hymns’ 
(suktas) of the Rgveda, and with which desires (desired objects) 
and by which rsis the gods each time wish to be praised — , learn 
these when they are told. 

6. A long life, heaven, wealth, and sons, thus the fourfold prayer has 
been stated in the beginning. Other (objects of desire) are indicated 
by hundreds by the praising rsis and also the gods. 

2. 1. The mantras attain the (desired) result by the correct method 

(• vidhi ) of (laid down in) the brahmana; they give success, when 
they are employed in the right ritual manner ( vidhivat ). Sincerity 
( satyam ) is a means of securing their success, and (also) self- 
control, peace of mind, endurance, freedom from envy, and self- 
command. 

2. Therefore the twice-born shall be of tranquil mind, quite devoted 
to muttering prayers and offering oblations, occupied with austerity 
(‘asceticism’) and study of the Veda, and compassionate to. living 
creatures. 

3. A ksatriya shall overcome misfortunes that have befallen him by 
the strength of his arms, a vaisya and a sudra by their wealth, the 
chief of the twice-born by muttered prayers and burnt-offerings. 

4. By austerity he attains heaven, by austerity he obtains greatness. 
The works (rites) of the man who is quite devoted to austerity and 
self-controlled succeed : 

5. the causing of enmity, propitiating, destroying of poison, removing 
of disease. Whichever rsi one needs (to have advantage), for which 
purpose the gods are praised, 

3. 1. that desire and that success accordingly fall to one’s share. These 

rites I will teach and the rules ( vidhanani ) for the rites. 

5. BD. 1, 7 ss. and Nir. 7, 3 a distinction is made between ‘praise’ (shift) and 
‘prayer’ (asis). 

6. Cf. BD. 1, 7 “prayer is expressed by means of objects such as heaven, long 
life, wealth, and sons”. — Cf. also BD. 1, 2. — Without knowledge of the 
divinity addressed in the mantras no one obtains the fruit of religious cere- 
monies : BD. 1, 4; Sarvanukraman!, Intr. 1. 

2. 1. Cf. Manu 11, 33 and 2, 155. — Brahmanas are learned and voluminous 

explanations of sacred knowledge in connection with the sacrifices. Cf. the 
title of the Samavidhanabrahmana ; see Meyer, p. I, n. 2. 

3. = Manu 11, 34 and no doubt quoted from that text. “Muttered prayers”: 
“muttering” (japaS): rhythmic repetition of a mantra (Vedic text included 
in the Samhitas or other sacred formulas). 

4. Cf. Manu 11, 233-244. 

5. See II, 20; III, 40. 



12 


2. In the beginning the preparatory rite causes success of the rites. 
In the beginning of his practice of the study of the Veda the twice- 
born shall perform the prajapatya. 

3. After having shaved the hairs of his head and beard, the hairs of 
his body, after having trimmed his nails and bathed, and being pure 
he shall stand in the day-time, but at night he shall sit, being pure 
and reserved in speech, 

4. speaking the truth he shall mutter the purificatory texts and also 
the vyahrtis. After having muttered them beginning with the syllable 
om, and the verse of the Rgveda called the Savitri, beginning with 
“that”, 

5. then the sukta “you, waters, are”, the (stanzas) containing the word 
suddha- } the sin-effacing sukta, the (stanzas) containing the word 
sam, those containing the word svasti, and the ninth book of the 
Rgveda, — 


2. The prajapatya (in) is a krcchram, a particular kind of religious austerity, 
described by Manu 11, 211 (see also 105) : it lasts 12 days, food being eaten 
during the first 3 in the morning only, during the next 3 in the evening 
only, during the following 3 days on\y if given unasked, and a plenary fast 
being observed during the last days. See I, 7, 2. For these bodily mortifi- 
cations in general see W. Gampert, Die Siihnezeremonien in der altindischen 
Rechtsliteratur, Orient. Inst. Prague 1939, p. 47 ff. — Cf. also SVidh. 1, 3, 1. 

3. Cf. Manu, 11, 224, and also such texts as SVidh. 1, 5, 15; 2, 4. — Sit: 
not lie. 

4. Purificatory texts: pavitrani , cf. Manu 11, 225 and Kulluka’s commenta^: 
“ pavitrani i,e. the aghamarsana- (i.e. RV, 10, 190, which, being recited, has 
an extraordinary power of expiating sin and evil; see also Gampert, o.c., 
p. 57) etc.” According to other commentaries the pavanianis (i e. RV. 9th 
mandala, AthV. 19, 71 etc.) are included among the pavitrani. See also ViDh. 
56; Manu 3, 256. — The vyahrtis (“utterances”) are the mystical utterance 
of the names of the seven worlds, and, expecially (also “great V3 r ahrtis”) the 
names of the first three ( bhur bhuvah svah) % which after the holy syllable 
om are pronounced by the brahmans in commencing their daily prayers. 
— The “sacred and mystical syllable om” (omkara-) : om, a word of solemn 
affirmation, a sacred exclamation to be uttered at the beginning and end 
of a reading of the Vedas or preceding any prayer; it is, from the 
Upanisads onwards, an object of profound religious meditation, the highest 
spiritual efficacy being attributed to it and to the three sounds (a, u, m), 
of which it consists. — Savitri : the celebrated stanza RV. 3, 62, 10, addressed 
to the sun (Savitr), which is repeated by every brahman at his morning and 
evening devotions. — See also SVidh. 1, 2, 5. 

5. In quoting siiktas (so-called h} T mns) or rcas (stanzas, verses) from the 
Rgveda, the text has adopted four methods (see also Meyer, p. XVIII f.) : it 
mentions the subject dealt with; it quotes the sukta or rc praftkena (i.e. 
by cop 3 ung out the first word or words) ; it indicates them by an artificial 
term consisting of the pratika and a suffix; it mentions the ‘author’ (rji) 
or the god addressed. Thus, in this verse, by “ye Waters, are” (apo hi 



13 


1. this shall always be recited at the beginning- and at the end of rites. 
Up to a thousand times, or to a hundred times or as far as ten times, 
he shall mutter 

2. the syllable om and the three vyahrtis, or ten thousand times the 
savitri. After having satisfied the teachers, the rsis, the metres, the 
godheads with (oblations of) water 

3. he shall resort to Virupaksa and mutter the group of mantras 
relating to Rudra. And he shall not speak with non-Aryans, nor 
with Sudras, nor with censured men, 

4. nor with a woman during her menses, nor with men who are fallen 
from their caste of who are lowest born, nor with persons hostile 
to gods and brahmans, nor with persons who revile teachers and 
spiritual guides, 

5. nor with those who are hostile to their parents; he shall despise 
nobody. He shall eagerly follow the (customs wdiich are) auspicious 
and the rules of correct conduct; thrice a day he shall go to the 
water (bathe). 

1. At the end of a period of twelve days he shall prepare a sthalipaka : 
to Agni, and next to Soma, and to both these (gods) in common a 
third (oblation). 


stheti suktam) RV. 10, 9 is meant; by “the (verses) containing the word 
“clear” ” ( siiddhavatyah ) 8, 84, 7-9, in which the word suddha - repeatedly 
occurs; the name “sin-effacing” ( aghamarsanam ) refers to 10, 190 (see Gam- 
pert, p. 57 f.) ; the term “containing the word sam", which is indicative of 
auspiciousness ( samvatyah ), to 7, 35 which begins with the words sam na 
indragm bhavatam ; the name “containing the word svastt”, which means 
“hail!” ( svastimatyah ), to 5, 51, 11-15 where this word is often used; the 
term pavamanls, finally, denotes the whole of RV. 9, which consists entirely 
of suktas addressed to Soma while the juice was flowing off clearly or 
‘clarifying’ (pavamana -). 

1. For the big numbers and the ‘contradiction’ (see I, 3, 5) I refer to Meyer, 
p. VI f. 

3. Virupaksa - (“diversely-eyed”) is a name of £iva, who has an odd number 
of eyes, the third being in his forehead. — The “group of mantras relating 
to Rudra (£iva)” ( raudram mantraganani) is one of the collections of mantras 
which are rubricated in the ritualistic texts merely by the name of the 
group. See AthV. Par. 32, 17 and 72, 6, 6. — Non-Aryans, etc. : cf. a similar 
precept Manu 11, 223. See also SVidh. 1, 2, 5. 

4. One should not converse with a menstruating woman: Manu 4, 57; see 
Gampert, o.c., p. 156 ; nor with the expelled : Manu 3, 150 ; 4, 79 ; see Gampert, 
p. 151 ft.: the expelled ( patita -) are the morally wicked, degraded, outcast or 
out caste, they are fallen from their social position. — Lowest born (gntyaja -) : 
^washermen etc. (see Kulluka, on Manu 4, 79). — Offences against brahmans : 
Manu 4, 165 ft. etc.; see Gampert, Index, p. 270; against the guru (spiritual 
teacher) Manu 4, 160; see Gampert, p. 163 etc. 



14 


2. And on the next day he shall offer an oblation consecrated to the 
All-gods and one consecrated to Rudra, to the Lord of death and 
also to Anumati. 

3. And another to Dhanvantari, and also one to the Gandharvas and 
the Apsarases ; the tenth to Brahmanaspati., the following is taught 
(to be consecrated) to Brahma 

4. (and) to Sarasvatl, and (the next) to Visnu, the last belongs to 
(Agni) Svistakrt. The offerings consisting of clarified butter in the 
beginning; when the sthalipaka-offering has been poured into the fire 

5. he shall, after having thrown a libation into the fire, satisfy die 
brahmans, and prepare (offerings) to the forefathers ; then he shall 
eat the remainders, being, according to the rule, pure and reserved 
in speech. 

1. Now the rule concerning all the (penances called) krcchra is com- 
municated in due order: (the rule of) the prajapatya and the ati- 
krcchra, and also of the samtapana, 

2. and the rule of the paraka krcchra, and of the candrayana. By one 
(krcchra) one obtains purity (becomes pure), by two one is released 
from evil (and sins), 

5. Cf. Mann 4, 135 ft.; 145; 6, 22; 11, 259. 

1. Sihalipaka-: a dish of rice or bar^ boiled in milk used as an oblation. — 
"A third” (trtlyani) sc. chuiiin “any rite accompanied by oblations”. Agni 
and Soma are closely connected in the ritual and in the Samhitas, the Rgveda 
excepted. Cf. the similar passages Manu 3, 85 f. and SVidh. 1, 3, 7; 2, 5. 
Each offering must be presented with a mantra, consisting of the name of 
the deity in the dative case and the exclamation used in making oblations, 
viz. sz'uha. 

2. The All-gods often are a particular class of deities; cf. Manu 3, 85. — 
Anumati: the goddess of the full-moon day; cf. Manu 3, 86. 

3. Dhanvantari: the physician of the gods; cf. Manu 3, 85. Gandharvas: dirine 
beings, skilled in medicine, in charge of the soma, and musicians attending 
the banquets of the gods; Apsaras: the munphs of Indra’s heaven. — 
Brahmanaspati: Brhaspati: the purohita or family priest of the gods. 

4. Sarasvatl is identified in the Brahmanas with Vac (Speech), and in post- 
Vedic mythology she is the goddess of wisdom and eloquence and wife of 
Brahma. — Agni Svistakrt is the “fire which performs the sacrifice well”; 
cf. Manu 3, 86; SVidh., l.c. 

1, Krcchra: see above (I, 3, 2). — An atikrcchra- is an extraordinary krcchra 
(at each meal one mouthful only is eaten); see, e.g., Manu 11, 213; Gampert, 
o.c., p. 48. — A samtapana- is a krcchra during which one subsists on the 
urine of cows, milk, sour milk, etc.; see,- e.g. f Manu 11, 212; Gampert, he. 
See on these krcchras in general Gampert o.c., p. 47 ff. ; Manu 11, 191; 
197; SVidh. 1, 2; GautDhs. 19, 20; ch. 26 and 27; Yajn. 3, 260 ff. and 
other texts quoted b}’ Meyer and Gampert. 

2. A paraka-k. is a fast for 12 days : Manu 11, 215. — Candray&w- “observing 
the moon’s course” is a fast regulated by the moon, the food being diminished 



15 


3. by three the mantras attain their aim and one is freed from minor 
sins, by four from (the sin of) ‘killing an embryo’, and also from 
(the sin incurred by) sacrificing for persons unworthy to offer 
sacrifices, 

4. by five one is released from all sins and evil deeds. By a 
taptakrcchra one wards off all evil (and sins). 

5. It is handed down that a complete candrayana is equivalent to these 
krcchras. By three candrayanas one becomes pure and attains to 
the world of Brahma. 

7 . 1. By eight one shall see the gods in person and also the Benefactors. 

After having learnt the sacred texts composed in metre one receives, 
by ten, all objects desired. 

2. A twice-born man who performs the (penance) revealed by Praja- 
pati shall eat during three days in the morning (only), during (the 
next) three days in the evening (only), during (the following) three 
days only (food given) unasked, and during the next period of 
three days he shall fast. 

3. A twice-born man who performs an atikrcchra shall take food 
during three periods of three days as described above, (but) one 
mouthful only at each meal, and he shall fast during the last period 
of three days. 

4. (Subsisting on) the urine of cows, cowdung, milk, sour milk, clari- 
fied butter, and a decoction of kusa-grass, and fasting during one 
(day) and night, (that is) called a samtapana krcchra. 

5. And the same, extended over three days, they consider a mahasam- 
tapana. But fasting during seven days is called sisusamtapana. 

every day by one mouthful during the dark fortnight, etc.; hence ‘lunar 
penance’. — “Evil (and sins)” {papaih ), see S. Rodhe, Deliver us from evil, 
p. 30 ff. 

3. Minor sins or offences ( upapataka -) : such as offending the guru, forgetting 
the Veda, theft, adultery. — The sin of ‘killing an embryo’: this term 
(i bhrunahatyd ) in course of time indicated also the crime of killing a learned 
brahman; see Gampert, o.c., p. 62 f. 

4. For the taptakrcchra-, see 1, 8, 1, and Gampert, o.c., p. 48. 

1. 1. The Benefactors ( varadah ) are a particular class of deceased ancesters who 

grant or fulfil wishes; Mark. Pur. 96, 46. — Cf. SVidh. 1, 2, 10. 

2. = Manu 11, 211 ; quoted by Sayana on SVidh. 1, 2, 3. 

3. = Manu 11, 213; cf. SVidh. 1, 2, 7 and Yajn. 3, 320; see above (I, 6, 1). 

4. = Manu 11, 212; cf. Yajn. 3, 212. 

5. According to Vi. 46, 20 and Yajn. 3, 316 the duration of a mahasamtapana- 
krcchra- is seven days. See also Gampert, o.c., p. 49. — In other texts a 
sisukrcchra- “children’s k.” is mentioned, which, being less rigorous, is 



16 


1. A brahman who performs a taptakrcchra must drink hot water, hot 
milk, hot clarified butter, and (inhale) hot air, each during three 
days, and bathe once with a concentrated mind. 

2. (With a) controlled (mind) he must drink water and remember the 
rule revealed by Prajapati: this they call the yatikrcchra, which 
drives away all (kinds of) physical weakness. 

3. A fast for twelve days by a person who controls himself and is 
attentive is called the paraka krcchra, which drives away all guilt. 

4. If one diminishes (one’s food daily by) one mouthful during the 
dark half of the moon and increases it (in the same manner) during 
the bright and bathes (daily at the time of) the three soma libations, 
that is called a candrayana. 

5. One must perform the same rule with regard to the candrayana 
which in the middle is like a barley-corn; in that case one should 
begin the lunar penance (with a) controlled (mind), on the first day 
of the bright half of the month. 

1. If a brahman eats (during a month daily) four mouthfuls in the 
morning and, after having performed his daily ritual work, four 
after sunset : (that is) declared the children’s lunar penance. 

2. If one eats, controlling oneself, (during a month daily) at midday, 
eight mouthfuls of sacrificial food : (that is called) the ascetics’ 
lunar penance. 

3. He who, concentrating his mind, eats during a month, in any way, 
thrice eighty mouthfuls of sacrificial food, comes (after death) to 
the world of the moon. 

^ * 

4. This rite the Rudras performed, likewise the Adityas, the Vasiis 
and the Maruts, together with the Rbhus in order to be released 
from all that is inauspicious. 

prescribed for women, children and old men; there is also a sisucandrayaiia- 
“children's c P " (see 1, 9, 1). A seven days' fast is, however, rigorous. 

L = Manu 11, 214; see Gampert, o.c., p. 48. 

2. The “ascetic's k." (yaftkrcchra-) is not mentioned by Gampert. — - For rapas 
“(bodily) injury, physical weakness" see also Rodhe, o.c., p. 73. 

3. = Manu 11, 215; see above (I, 6, 2). — “Attentive", Le. who commits 
no mistakes. 

4. = Manu 11, 216; cf. Yajn, 3, 324-326; see above (I, 6, 2). 

5. e= Manu 11, 217. For the c. “which in the middle is like a barley-corn" 
(yavamadhyama-) y i.e. which begins and ends with a fast and allows the 
eating of 15 mouthfuls on the day of full moon, see Gampert, o.c., p. 56 f. 

1. But for the order of two words *= Manu 11, 219. 

2. Cf. Manu 11, 218. 

3. = Manu 11, 220; cf. Yajn. 3, 327. 

4. Cf. Manu 11, 221. The 11 Rudras, whose names vary considerably in different 


17 


5. A yavaka krcchra must during a week be swallowed by a person 
who controls himself and he must, together with standing, sitting 
down, and the three ablutions, mutter verses which intend to purify. 

1. In a week (a yavaka) performed according to the rule purifies, one 
by one, skin, blood, flesh, bones, fat and marrow. 

2. Each single week purifies skin etc. When one’s self has been puri- 
fied by these observances one shall, unwearied, perform one’s rites. 

3. Then one doubtless attains all the desired aims one wishes for. All 
grains (of rice), oil-cake, buttermilk are each singly a means for 
purifying. 

4. With a pure self and speaking the truth one shall perform one’s 
rite, restraining one’s organs of sense. I will tell the rites of a 
person who is pure in such a manner together with the mantras. 
As follows: 

5. Just so long as three days he shall fast from the beginning of all 
the rites or he shall, during three days, eat only at night; then he 
shall begin the rite. 

1. Of them that regularly execute (religious) practices the observance 
at the beginning of the practice is for a period of three days. Or, 
after having performed a samnipatika-rite, he (one) must fast 
afterwards. 

texts, are a class of gods, represented sometimes as sons of Rudra, and 
sometimes as his manifestations; the Adityas are 7 or 12 deities of the 
heavenly sphere; the 8 Vasus represent natural phenomena; the Maruts 
are storm-gods and sons of Rudra; the Rbhus are three divine or semi- 
divine beings, celebrated for their skill as artists. 

5. Ydvaka- is a particular food prepared from barley, a yavaka- krcchra- is a 
penance consisting in eating this food, prepared in water, during a week, 
a fortnight, or a month. See also Gautama 19, 13; Gampert, o.c., p. 61; 111; 
149. — The three prescribed ablutions : at dawn, noon and sunset. Cf. e.g. 
Manu 6, 22, where we also find “let him (the hermit in the forest) alternately 
stand and sit down.” 

3. Manu } 11, 92 prescribes that, in order to remove the guilt of drinking 
spirituous liquor, one must eat during a year once a day at night grains of 
rice or oilcake; cf. also Yajn. 3, 254. — “Buttermilk” (takra -) : to be exact, 
buttermilk mixed with a third part of water; see also Yajn. 3, 322. 

5. “Eat only at night” (which in my opinion, is the meaning of nakta-), cf. Pet. 
Diet., s.v., where a verse is quoted from the DevlPurana, which regards this 
sort of penance as better than fasting, eating begged food, etc. 

1. The text refers to those who are constantly engaged in performing their 
religious practices. See also SVidh. 2, 1, 2, where it is stated that, in case 
the text does not give particular instruction, a three days’ fast is compulsory. 
— He (one) : sic ! — A sdmnipdtika- is a rite which has to be performed 
at once on account of a sudden event; see GobhGS. 4, 5, 13 with the comm. 
This fast is considered as the consecration. 


2 



18 


2. He (one) shall begin the rites which give a long life, being attentive 
on mantras, and mutter the stanzas which contain the word sam 
and the mantras which contain the word svasti, and the trivrt 
stanzas. 

3. Having attained, in the wilderness, when the sun has arisen, the 
northeast, or the east, or the north, a brahman shall, on a pure spot 
(and) concentrated, 

4. wearing his clothes, having bathed with total immersion in water, 
having sprinkled (himself), mutter the verses which contain the 
word suddha, then the verses which contain the word “water”, RV. 
IX, and the sin-effacing sukta. 

5. Having in this manner bathed thrice, and (being) pure, one shall 
perform three, six, eight or twelve, sixteen or eighteen ‘breathing- 
exercises’, 

12. 1. or until a hundred one shall restrain one’s breath, muttering the 

sacred text called the “sin-effacing”; or one shall restrain one’s 
breath until the heart is satisfied. 

2. In proportion as his heart blames a (man)’s evil deeds, even so far 
is his body freed from that guilt ( adhanna ). 

3. Having burnt his faults (sins) by restraining his breath, wearing 
white garments, (being) pure, having rinsed his mouth according to 
the rules, he shall mount a layer of bundles of grass. 

4. Having instruments for cleaning in his hand, being seated with his 
legs bent so that the right lies on the other, looking, without winking, 
at the space between two quarters of the sky, covering the eyes, 

5. or reciting quickly in his mind the syllable om, the three vyahrtis, 
and the savitrl stanza — , he shall have recourse to the Veda etc. 

2. Cf. SVidh. 2, 1, 4. — See above (I, 3, 5). — The “trivrt stanzas” are the 
9 stanzas of RV. 9, 11, of which in the so-called trivrt stoma (i.e. a certain 
form of ritual chant) first the three 1st verses of each 'strophe’ consisting 
of 3 verses are sung together, then the 2nd verses, and lastly the 3rd, — See 
also Meyer, p. I, n. 3. 

3. Northeast etc.: this is the quarter of the gods, the “gate of heaven” £Br. 

6, 6, 2, 4. 

4. Cf. I, 3, 5. 

5. ‘Breath-exercises’ ( prunayama -) is the name of the “restrictions placed on 
the breath” (cf. MarkPur. 39, 40; see the description given in this text 
vs. 27 ff.), the general characteristic of which is indicated by the terms 
rccaka- (emission), piiraka- (inhalation), and knmbhaka- (suspension) (of the 
breath). See also Gampert, o.c., p, 61. 

12. 1. A similar prescript is given by Manu 11, 233. — See also I, 3, S. 

2. Manu 11, 229. 

3. ff. Such prescripts are very common. 



19 


!. 1. In the morning he must recite softly, at midday aloud, aloud also 

in the afternoon ; at dusk he must rest 

2. Having arisen in the hour sacred to Brahma, having thrice bathed, 
the twice-born man must recite, proceeding according to the moder- 
ate way of acting, neither too quickly nor too slowly. 

3. When muttering (the formulas of) the first (i.e. morning) twilight- 
ceremony, he must stand, and he must perform the last (i.e. evening 
twilight-ceremony) seated; and he must by no means speak mean- 
while or pause. 

4. (But) he shall pause when a brahman has come upon, and he may 
converse with him at will; as soon as he has seen a sudra 
approaching he must by no means study (recite). 

5. A twice-born man, who mutters the first sukta, which is dedicated 
to Agni, and which is eminent, (and) esteemed by the brahmans, 
and which causes increase of wealth and is (of an) auspicious 
(character), shall obtain property. 

k 1. When, restrained and pure, one mutters all the (texts of the) rsi 
and (of) his son, one doubtless obtains the fruits of the (complete) 
collection (samhita) of the Rgveda. 

2. For muttering this elevenfold eternal brahma (a man) acquires (the 
fulfilment of) all his wishes and is freed from sins (evil). 

3. When he, without eating, (mutters) this collection every morning, 
every day, he obtains a full (long) life, knowledge (vidya), wealth, 
sons and a house that suffers no loss. 

4. Whilst muttering this brahma he must not look at sudras and other 

5. Cf. Meyer, p. XXXIV. 

1 2. “The hour sacred to Brahma” (see also Manu 4, 92 ; ViSm. 60, 1, etc.) : the 

third hour (of 48 minutes) before sunrise. 

3. Cf. Manu 2, 101-103, according to whom the guilt contracted during the pre- 
vious night or day is removed by doing so ; the man who does otherwise, i.e. 
who does not worship standing in the morning etc., shall be excluded from 
all rights and duties of an Aryan. 

4. To brahmans reverence is due. Qudras are not allowed to hear or learn 
the Veda. 

5. The sukta RV. 1, 1 is, of course, meant. In st. 1 Agni is called “he who 
procures wealth (to the sacrificer)”, in st. 3 the wish is pronounced that 
the sacrificer will acquire -wealth etc. 

1. “All the texts of the (same) rsi”, i.e. the suktas RV. 1, 1-10, ascribed to 
Madhucchandas, and 1, 11, w'hich has been seen by Madhucchandas* son Jetr. 

2. These Vedic texts were often called brahman. As to brahman see my Notes 
on brahman, Utrecht 1950. 

3. Cf. I, 18, 2; 3; 23, /. — “This collection”, RV. 1, 1-11. — Vidya, esp. supra- 
normal knowledge. 


20 


men of that kind; having looked (at them), he becomes pure after 
having sipped water, (or) he must look at a cow, a fire or the sun. 

5. Muttering in a low tone is ten times (more efficacious than a sacrif- 
ice), an inaudible (prayer) a hundred times (more efficacious), the 
mental (relation of sacred texts) one must know to be a thousand 
times (more efficacious): in this way the rule about muttering is 
taught. 

15. 1. First one must perform the rite of the savitrl stanza in order to 

avert the evil influences, to obtain prosperity, to acquire wealth 
and cattle, to attain a state of welfare. 

2. For this nicrt which is equivalent to the Vedas and consists totally 
of brahma has been seen by the wise Visvamitra by means of 
austere asceticism. 

3. With it one shall continually perform oblations and sacrifices 
consisting of muttered prayers for the sake of success of all wishes; 
this is called the highest brahman. 

4. This is also, when said in inverted order, a destroyer of foes; 
(recited) in the inverted order of syllables it is recommended when 
incantations are needed. 

5. One shall know that the rite, with which this inverted order of its 

4. The very sight of a sudra often defiles a brahman. See, e.g., Meyer, WAR., 
p. 432. — A brahman becomes pure by touching water (see, e.g., Manu 
5, 99). According to Manu 5, 87 touching a cow or looking at the sun puri- 
fies a brahman. 

5. Cf. Manu 2, 85. 

15. 1. Savitrl: see I, 3, 4. — For the idea of averting evil influences (ia/i/i-) see 

a book by D. J. Hoens on this subject, which will appear in 1951. 

2. Nicrt is the technical term for a defective metre. — 'Austere’ : 'asceticism’ 
(tapas) is often called ngra- “austere, mighty” : by tapas one can accumulate 
and win supranormal power. — Visvamitra, a famous sage, the reputed 
author of many parts of RV. Ill, among which is the savitrl-stanza. 

3. Muttering prayers as a religious sacrifice : Manu 2. 85 ff . In magical rites all 
over the world an inaudible whisper, a low tone etc. are very often resorted 
to, among other things because people who know such spells always take the 
utmost care to prevent being overheard. See e.g., H. Webster, Magic, 1948, 
P- 96. 

4. “By quarters” (viz. of the verse; by padas). — For the purpose of incan- 
tation or witchcraft certain ceremonies are modified, and mantras are recited 
in inverted order. The backward recitation of the savitrl (which runs as 
follows: tat savitur varcnyam bhargo dcvasya dhimahi ) dhlyo yo vah praco- 
dayat) is explained AthVPar. 34, where the text is given in full : iyada- 
copr email yoyodhi \ Itimadht syavadergobha yam mrervatuvitsaiat . See also 
AthVPar. 31, 9, 4. “Ein ganzer Spruch wird von hinten nach vorne herge- 
sagt, urn so seine normale Wirkung aufzuheben oder in das Gegensatzliche 
zu wenden. So wenn... ein frommer Spruch Boses wirken soil”, Hdwtb. 
deutsch. Abergl. VII, 845. 



21 


syllables is employed, is infallible; this is the power of brahma. 

6. One shall cast into the fire fuel or fuel-sticks which are productive 
of disturbance (obstacles, thwarting influences) whilst muttering 
(the savitri) in the reverse order of the syllables ; (the oil must be) 
mustard oil, the sacrificial ladles (sruc) made of vibhitaka wood. 

7. Who wishes to vex (his) foe, or also to ruin (him) shall (with the 
savitri recited) by quarters vex the foes and (with the savitri recited) 
by syllables annihilate him. — 

1. Now I shall tell the rule concerning the first sukta of the Rgveda, 
as the rsi Madhuchandas in olden times made it together with 
this rite. 

2. Restrained one shall for a year carry fire on one’s head, during the 
fourth part of a prana eating that which remains of the burnt 
offerings. 

3. Offering an oblation one shall, speaking the truth, thrice worship 
every day ; but when the time of vrata (vow) has arrived, one shall 
offer an oblation to Agni. 

4. When there is no fire, the fire will, after (one has) merely meditated 
on (it), be at one’s disposal at the end of the vow; and whom one 
wishes to burn, him the fire burns. 

5. Even in water the fire of that eminent man who performs that vow 
blazes; and the fire carefully furnishes him with the desired objects 
he wishes for. — 

1. Next (there are) seven strophes of three verses, which are quoted 
as beginning with Vayu etc. ; when one, well-prepared for the 
solemn rite, continually mutters them, one obtains the benefits one 
wishes for. 

6. AthVPar. 26 describes the properties of the logs of wood used as fuel 
in various ceremonies (Samillaksanam), which may be for good or evil. — 
The wood of the vibhitaka tree (terminalia bellerica) is also according to 
AthVPar. 26, 5, 3 fit to be used in ruining enemies; the same term (ucca- 
tana-) is used there. 

7. “Syllables” : the word ( varna -) can also mean “sound, vowel, word”. 

2. Fire on the head: see also SVidh. 3, 7, 2 (the fire will blaze for him every- 
where and burn all objects he wants to destroy). — The word prana- “breath, 
respiration” also denotes a measure of time, viz. the time required for the 
pronunciation of 10 long syllables; see e.g. Var. BS. ch. 2. 

3. An oblation (caru) t viz. one made of rice, barley, and pulse, boiled with 
butter and milk. — A ‘vow* (vrata-) is any religious observance or practice, 
a meritorious act of devotion or austerity, etc. — “Worship”, or “approach 
(the fire), conciliate (it, divine powers)”. 

4. I have interpreted dhyanamatra - “mere meditation, m. alone” as if the text 
reads dhyatamatra - “merely meditated on”. 


22 


2. Further he who wishes for mental vigour shall continually mutter 
the stanza (beginning with) “Lord of the seat”, which belongs to 
(the texts seen by the) rsi Medhatithi, and with that (verse) he shall 
offer an ajya-oblation. — 

3. A brahman, who has bathed and is pure shall regularly mutter the 
stanza “pleasant (etc.)”, addressing the earth: (then) he wins a big 
site (great area) unrivalled and free from thorns. — 

4. Having, during the celebration of a funeral rite ( sraddha ), plunged 
his thumb into food with the fine stanzas beginning with “this 
Visnu” — by doing so he removes the raksas. 

5. Having the length of a thumb the divine Visnu walks about over 
the earth for the sake of killing the raksasas; that is why he will 
strike at a sraddha. 

17. 1. The text refers to RV. 1, 2 (9 stanzas), dedicated to Vayu, Indra and Vayu, 

Mitra and Varuna, and 1, 3 (12 stanzas), in which the Asvins, Indra, the 
All-gods and Sarasvati are addressed. 

2. The stanza meant is RV. 1, 18, 6 sadasas patim odbhutam priyam indrasya 
kamyam | saium mcdhum ayasisam “I have solicited the wonderful Lord of 
the seat, the amiable friend of Indra for reward and mental vigour”. “Lord of 
the seat or of the sacrificial assembly’ is a name given to Indra and Agni 
(RV. 1, 21, S); here, perhaps, Bfhaspati is meant. — “Mental vigour” 
(mtdha), or “wisdom, intelligence”. — Medhatithi: the rsi who saw RV. 1, 
12-23. — Ajya- is melted or clarified butter used for oblations, or for 
anointing an}ffiing sacrificed; in a wider sense it can signify oil and milk- 
used irtstead of such butter. 

3. RV. 1, 22, 15. RV. 1, 22 is addressed to various gods. St. 15, which in a 
slightly different form occurs also among the funeral verses of the AthV. 
(18, 2, 19), runs: “Be pleasant, O earth, a thornless resting-place ; give us a 
broad refuge” (cf. the words in RVidh. 1, 17, 3). — “Thorns” is a term 
applied to any troublesome person, enemy, annoyance or source of vexation”. 
See also 2, 12, 1. — Cf. 2, 28, 5. 

4. These stanzas (RV. 1, 22, 17-21) are praise in honour of Visnu; 17-20 form 
one connected passage also in SamaV. (II, 1019-1022) and AthV. (7, 26, 4-7). 
The first stanza is quoted by the commentary on AthV. 7, 26 as used by 
the Naksatrakalpa (19) in a certain rite, in performing which a triple amulet 
is tied on. For other applications see Whitney-Lanman, p. 405. — The raksas 
(or raksasas), evil or malignant demons (which are often regarded as beings 
which go about at night, haunt cemeteries, disturb sacrifices, etc.), are not 
mentioned here; but cf. the next stanza. — See also my note on I, 17, 6. 

5. Cf. RV. 1, 22, 17 “Visnu has traversed this (world)”; st. 16; 7, 100, 4 he 
traversed the earth to bestow it on man for a dwelling; in the RV. Visnu 
in alliance with Indra is mentioned as vanquishing demons. In the QitBr. 1, 

2, 5, 5 (see also TBr. 1, 6, 1, 5 and other texts) this god is represented as a 
dwarf (see also Eggeling’s note, SEE. 12, p. 59), in the Epic and the Puranas 
his dwarf incarnation is well-known : appearing, as a dwarf, before the king 
of the daitvas, “titans”, he begged of this demon as much land as he could 
step over in three paces; then, he took two strides over heaven and earth, 
leaving the nether world to the daitya-king. — Raksasas and other evil beings 



23 


6. And the food that is fully attended by faith and devotion will be 
imperishable. Therefore the 'taking by the thumb’ is taught with 
respect to all sraddhas. - — 

7. From evil he has done (contracted) during seven existences, and 
(also) when he has eaten forbidden food, he becomes thoroughly 
pure, when he has, in (the midst of) water, muttered the stanza 
(beginning with) “that of Visnu” once. 

8. The nine stanzas taught as “the mothers go on (etc.)” are fit to be 
used in a consecration (by sprinkling), they are declared to give 
long life, to heal and to deliver from evil (sins). 

9. When bound or confined (imprisoned) one must mutter the (suktas 
of the) rsi Sunahsepa: then one is freed from all bonds, whether 
one be ill or not. 

obtrude themselves at the sacrifice to the dead (see next note) ; hence rites 
and formulas to drive them away (see e.g. Whitney-Lanman, note on 18, 2, 
28 and W. Caland, Altindischer Ahnenkult, 1893, p. 3 f.) — See also the next 
note. 

6. Cf. Ill, 2, 3. — As to the thumbs see I, 17, 4. — A sraddha- is a ceremony 
for the benefit of dead ancestors, which supplies them with strengthening 
food; it is performed on special occasions. Three or another odd number of 
brahmans are chosen to represent the deceased fathers; they are given food, 
and the ceremony ends when they are satisfied. The person who has the 
sraddha performed takes these brahmans by the thumb: see W. Caland, 
Altindischer Ahnenkult, p. 26. He also makes them touch the sacrificial food 
with their thumbs : ibidem, p. 62, and, especially p. 187 f., p. 188 : “Gleichwie 
nun einstmals der Sonnengott Visnu . . . als Daumling ... die ganze Schojv 
f ung in drei Stapfen uberschritten hatte . . ebenso steckt der Opferer des 
Brahmana Daumen, den er sich als Visnu denkt, in die Speise. Damit meint 
er offenbar, daB der Daumen die bosen Geister von der Speise abhalt.” Caland 
cites Yama (in Hemadri, p. 1378), who gives two slokas which are identical 
with 1, 17, 5 a-c; 6c-d. See also Baudh. DhC- 2, 15, 2, and the Baudhayana 
text quoted by Caland, o.c., p. 26 “the asuras and raksas etc. are driven 
away”. 

7. “Eating forbidden food”: see Manu 11, 64, and Buhlers note; on 
forbidden food in general, see, e.g., Manu 11, 205 ft. — “That (highest step) 
of Visnu" 7 : RV. 1, 22, 20 “The sage men always see that highest step of 
Visnu, like an eye stretched on the sky”. According to QBr. 3 1 , 7, 1, 18 these 
w’ords mean: “See that conquest of V.” In describing the rules of ritual 
bathing ViDh. 64, 20 has the verse used after diving under water. 

8. RV. 1, 23, 16-24. “Der atharvaartige SchluB (16-24) begleitet ein Opfer 
fur die Flusse und das Reinigungsbad, das wie der spatere avabhrtha die 
heilige Handlung beschlieBt (Geldner, RV., p. 19). The verses partly recur 
in AthV. 1, 4 and 5, which are reckoned to the Vater hymns" (KausS. 7, 14) ; 
see Whitney-Lanman, p. 4. See also AthVPar. 32, 26; 27. — “Curative”: 
cf. RV. 1, 23, 19; 20; 21. — “Delivering...”: RV. 1, 23, 22 “Bear this 
away, O waters, whatever evil is in me . . 

9. RV. 1, 2-5-30 are ascribed to the rsi (^unahsepa, who had been bought from 
his father to be a substitute for Rohita, the son of a childless king, Haris- 



24 


10. The man, who wishes to obtain perpetual benefits from Indra, the 
destroyer of castles, shall every day praise Indra with the sixteen 
stanzas (addressed to that god). 

18. 1. The sukta composed by Hiranyastupa and containing the praise of 

Indra’s deeds, muttering that (and) well prepared for the rite, one 
drives back one s enemies without effort. 

2. Who with the stanza “hither with the black” continually praises the 
sun, in the morning, at midday, and also at the setting of the sun, 
shall live free from disease and happy. 

3. The single stanza “hither with the black” — , meditating upon the 
gods at night, having, with this (stanza), poured into the fire 
clarified butter, he will obtain a long span of life. 

4. A traveller must concentrate his attention upon the stanza addressed 
to the Sun (, beginning with) “the paths which” : prosperous he goes 
his way, and he finds his home undamaged. 

5. The sukta “Pusan (etc.)” which the rsi Ghaura Kanva recited must 
be considered as proper to travelling; it drives off (enemies) who 
obstruct the way. 

candra, who had made the vow that if a son were bom to him he would 
sacrifice him to Varuna. When bound to the sacrificial post, Q. freed himself 
by reciting- almost the whole of the stanzas of these seven suktas. See AitBr. 
7, 13 ff. and cf. especially RV. 1, 24, 12; 13; "May he to whom the fettered 
Q. prayed, King Varuna, deliver us...”. According to TS. 5, 2, 1, 3 and 
Kath. 2 p. 13, 16 Q. himself was varunagrhita - "seized by Varuna”, i.e. ill, 
a tradition which is not only in greater harmon}' with RV. 1, 24 than the 
other version of the legend, but also with the text of the RVidh. 

10. RV. 1, 30, 1-16, addressed to Indra; see e.g. st. 10, where the god is called 

the bestower of all good things, and the first word of st. 16 sasvad „for 
ever” (cf. RVidh. sasvataii kaman "perpetual benefits”). The RV. verses 
are regarded as a request for a daksina (donation to the officiating priest(s)), 
but st. 5; 13; 16 would be in perfect harmony with the intention expressed in 
the RVidh. 

18 1. RV. 1, 32, seen by the sage Hiranyastupa, glorifies the battle of Indra and 

Vrtra and the victory of the god. 

2. RV. 1, 35, 2. The sukta is addressed to the Sun (Savitar), who is called by 
name in st. 2. St. 9 says that the god drives away affliction or disease. 

3. See also II, 22, 6. The st. RV. 1, 35, 2 'runs as follows : "With the black 

darkness he advances, (god Savitar), bringing to rest the immortal and the 

mortal” (cf. Geldner, RV., p. 38), or which seems a better translation: 
“Through the b.dh.a. appointing to the i. etc. its place”. 

4. RV. 1, 35, 11 "Your.... dustless, well-arranged paths in the atmosphere 
— * (come), also today, to us by them . . protect us . . 

5. RV. 1, 42, which is addressed to the god Pusan, who is a protector of cattle 
and of human possessions in general ; he is a knower of paths, and a guar- 
dian of roads; sometimes the conception of vimuc- "deliver” is connected 
with him. In st. 1 the god is besought to remove evil or distress (avihas) 



25 



to Rudra, will always obtain from Sankara absence of evil influences 
for women, men and cattle. 

7. With the same series of six stanzas he shall daily pour out clarified 
butter, or he shall, at the days of the changes of the moon (the 
parvan days), prepare sacrificial food {caru) intended for Rudra, 
when he is desirous of welfare. — 

1. With “upwards” he shall worship the rising sun every day, for this 
(sukta) destroys heart-disease and is an excellent furtherer of health. 

2. Muttering the half-stanza “enemy” he must call to mind the man 
whom he hates : in a week the author of injury makes himself 
odious. 

3. The man who is seized by diseases and ill must, being well prepared 
for the rite, regularly and frequently mutter the series of three 
verses which are the last of those (seen) by Praskanva: this is (a 
furtherer of) health. 

4. And the last half-stanza of that is called the 'hate of the hating'. 
Whom he hates, on him he shall set his mind and when he has 
seen him, he shall mutter it: 

5. if he has done injury, he becomes odious in three days. Muttering 
it when the sun rises, he (obtains) an endless life, prestige when he 
mutters it at noon, 

from the path, in st. 3 to drive away the waylayer. A man desirous of going 
a long or dangerous way has to sacrifice while muttering this sukta (AsvGS. 
3, 7, 10). 

6. RV. 1, 43, 1-6, addressed to Rudra. — Isana and G a hkara are names of the 
god Giva (the Vedic Rudra). In st. 6 it reads “he should make happiness or 
prosperity (sam . . . karat i, hence the name G a hkara “causing h. or p., 
beneficent”) to our men, women, the cow”. — “Absence etc.” : santi. 

1. RV. 1, 50, addressed to the Sun. According to BD. 3, 113 the last triplet 
of this sukta (st. 11-13) is destructive of disease: 11 “When to-day Thou... 
riseth, O Surya, destroy my heart-ache and jaundice”. See also Geldner, 
RV., p. 54. 

2. RV. 1, 50, 13 II: “(This Sun...) deliveres the (my) enemy to me; that I 
be not subject to the enemy.” See BD. 3, 114 “in a hemistich (of the last 
stanza) there is hostility to foes”. 

3. RV. 1, 50, 11-13. Praskanva Kanva is the reputed 'poet 1 of RV. 1, 44-50. 
— Cf. Meyer's note (p. VII) on the repetitions (cf. I, 19, 2) in the Rgvidhana. 

4. RV. 1, 50, 13 II again. See above (I, 19, 2). Several manuscripts of the 

Sarvanukramani (one of the ancient indexes to the RV.) add: “and the last 

hemistich is a destroyer of enemies”. 

5. “Injury”: the word agas (see also 19, 2) may be translated by “sin, evil 

conduct etc.” ; see Rodhe, passim. — “Prestige” : the word tejas means 

“energy, spirit, vital power, dignity, majesty, lustre, spiritual or moral 
influence”, and the like. 


26 


20. 1. but when the sun sets, he wards off (the person) who hates him (by 

muttering it). (Spiritual) power, prestige, and also health — ‘hate 
towards the hating’ (it is) called. — 

2. The nine suktas (beginning with) “with the cattle”, which Parasara 
recited — (with them) one shall take away the life of one’s 
adversaries and (with them) one controls one’s enemies. 

3. When one desires sons, cattle, property, heaven, (a long) life, 
unimpaired eyesight, one must study the eleven purifying suktas 
which come from Suparna. 

4. When one, entirely concentrated, mutters the stanzas (beginning 
with) “Who?” and which refer to the Self, one will obtain the 
highest residence, all the eternal light 

5. An ascetic (muni), who even when he is on the verge of dying 

mutters the sukta which begins with “towards us happy ”, which 

gives long life and is dedicated to the All-gods, — having muttered 
that he will obtain a long life-time. 

21. 1. At the time of a ceremony for the benefit of the dead ancestors 

( smddha ), one must recite the three stanzas beginning with 
“pleasant” : without being terrific one’s forefathers enter the highest 
light. 

20. 1. II may be a recapitulation : “By these verses he obtains . . and it is 

called . . On ojos “(spiritual) power” see my treatize on ojas- and ttgra-, 
which, I hope, will appear before long. 

2. RV. I, 65-73, addressed to Agni and seen by Parasara Gaktya. There is not 
much in these suktas, which would occasion this magical use: cf., e.g. 1, 73, 
9. See also II, 13, 1. 

3. The Sauparnani suktani “suktas relating to Suparna” are a series of ‘ad- 
ditional hymns’ appended to the regular collection (so-called khilas), ten 
addressed to the Asvins (see Scheftelowitz Apokryphen, p. 54-68; RV. ed. 
SK., p. 915 ff. ; cf. Macdonell, BD. II, p. 113) and one to Indra-Varuna, 
which is identical with the 11th Valakhilya sukta, i.e. RV. 8, 59. The seer 
of the latter is, according to the SarvanukramanT, Suparna. In the 5th sukta 
(Khila collection in the Kashmir Ms. 1, 6, 7) the text asks for offspring 
etc.; Kh. 1, 12, 7 f. (cf. 1, 5, 7 for eyesight). See Suparnadhyaya 1, 1 
(J. Charpentier, Die Suparnasage, 1920, p. 207), which probably is the source 
of this passage in the RVidh. I also refer to Meyer, RVidh., p. XXIV. 

4. RV. 1, 84, 16-18, addressed to Indra and beginning with the word ka- “who?” 
The name adhyatmika - “relating to the self (soul)” or “relating to the 
supreme spirit” seems to have been given to these verses, because ka- “Who?” 
is often used to denote the Creator, God, or the soul. Hence also, I think, 
their employment. 

5. RV. 1, 89; cf. especially st. 2 “the gods must prolong our life”, and. st. 9, 
This sukta is addressed to the All-gods. 

21. 1. RV. 1, 90, 6-8. These stanzas, which have an atharvanic character, are also 

used in the BrhArUpan. 6, 3, 6 during a ceremony for the “attaining of a 



27 


2. With the sukta “you, Soma” one must look at the moon when it 
has risen; and, holding fuel in the hands, one must worship it, 
every month when it is new : 

3. for that month he will be entirely free from the threefold sorrow. 
This (sukta) has been seen of yore by Gotama as a means of 
destroying death for himself. 

4. And, being concentrated, one must worship (the moon) when it 
rises at the time of its being full : (then) one will acquire residences, 
and one reaches the state of being in the [same] world of the 
moon. — 

5. (The man) who desires wealth shall, having bathed, pure (and) 
disciplined, regularly and always mutter (the sukta) “these” : (then) 
he will obtain the wealth he desires. 

1. When one desires a (full) lifetime one must always concentrate one’s 
attention upon (the sukta) “this”, composed by Kutsa, and at each 
stanza one should, reserved in speech and pure, pour out oblations 
of clarified butter. 

2. (Only after) having bathed and being disciplined one shall mutter 
(it): (then) one will actually overcome misfortune. — With (the 
sukta) “shining away from us” one should, after having bathed, 
when the sun has reached the meridian, 

great wish”. The repeated word madhtt- “anything sweet or pleasant” seems 
to have brought about their being instrumental in making the ancestors “not 
terrific”. 

2. RV. 1, 91, addressed to Soma, which is not only the juice of the soma plant, 
but also the moon (as the receptacle of the draught of immortality and as 
the lord of the plants). “Holding fuel in the hands” : this is the way in which 
pupils approach their teacher. See also Kausika Sutra 42, 8 (Caland, Altin- 
disches Zauberritual, Amsterdam Academy 1900, p. 144). 

3. Sorrow, (uneasiness, pain, trouble) is threefold, as it either originates with 
the person suffering it, or springs from gods or other beings. — “Destroying 
death”: cf. RV. 1, 91, 19 and also 12; 15; 17. 

4. The word vas ay i si must mean “dwellings, residences” : cf . RV, 1, 91, 21, 
where Soma is called “the one who wins suksiti- “secure dwelling, a good 
abode”. 

5. RV. 1, 92; cf. especially 13-15: “Usas, . . . bring to us good fortune, shine 
on us (U. is Dawn) bountifully” and so on; 7 U. is called a “bearer of 
presents made from affection” ; 8 the poet asks for wealth. 

1. RV. 1, 94; cf. especially st. 16 ”You know, Agni, what is welfare, prolong 
our life on the earth”, and st. 1. — Kutsa is the seer of RV. 1, 94-98. 

2. II RV. 1, 97. The 1st stanza runs as follows: “Shining away evil ( agha -) 
from us, O Agni, shine thou wealth unto (us).” The first words are repeated 
at the end of all stanzas of this sukta, which is, without a variant except in 
the last stanza, also found in AthV. : 4, 33. KausS. 9, 2 reckons it to the 
brhacchanti i.e. “the great (formulas, rites etc.) for averting evil”. AthVPar. 



28 


3. with pure desires and being moderate in eating, at each verse pour 
out ghee, or daily eight pieces of fuel: this sukta is a destroyer 
of evil. 

4. Just like a reed from its sheath, thus one is freed from evil. — (The 
sukta) “to Jatavedas'’ and so on one must always mutter for 
auspicious progress. 

5. (Then) one will not (need to) fear foes, when one has started on a 
journey (and reaches) a way of difficult approach. Either in royal 
service, or among a troop of dogs, even when one has repeatedly 
(or : in various ways) been infamous, 

6. (when engaged) in a deed of audacity which cannot be executed, or 
even in peril of life: when one mutters the (sukta) addressed to 
Jatavedas one is freed from them (he. those dangers). 

7 . And when, wishing to win property, one has started (on a journey) 
one must mutter (it) in thought: (then) one goes successful and 
prosperous and one will not perish on the way. 

23. 1. Having attained ones object one shall, as one goes home, always 

concentrate one’s attention upon the same (sukta); when the sun 
has risen one shall mutter it, (and) also when it has set, 

2. a blessing of the day in the morning and a blessing of the night in 
the evening ; and at daybreak one must regularly mutter this (sukta) 
because it destroys evil dreams. — 

32, 6 it is included among the texts which destroy evil; 26 it is instrumental 
in bringing about santi (“extinction of evil”); cf. also 18; Manu 11, 249 
reckons it to the texts by muttering which even a drinker of spirituous 
liquor becomes pure (see Bidder, o c , p. 480) ; see also VasDhQ. 26, 5 ; 
Yajn. 3, 3 it is used in a purificatory rite. 

4. This simile is not rare. See e.g. QatapBr. 4, 3, 3, 16 : “When all was . . . 
free from danger and destruction, the gods plucked him out of all evil, even 
as one might pluck out a reed from its sheath . . . ; and as the reed becomes 
stripped of its sheath, so is he thereby freed from all evil . . ; KathaUp. 
6, 17 ; etc. — RV. 1, 99, addressed to Agni Jatavedas and reading like this : 

“A. J shall burn down the property of the malicious one; he shall bring 

us over all difficult passages (difficulties), over the 'dangers (disaster), as 
with a ship over the river”. — “Auspicious progress” : the word svastyayana- 
also means “blessing, benediction, welfare, a mantra recited for attaining 
that etc.” — AthVPar. 32, 11 mentions a group of s.-texts. 

5. “Infamous” : the technical term abhisasta- applies to a suicide, to the murderer 
of a member of the second or third class who has studied the Veda, to a 
person begotten with a menstruating woman, etc , see especially ApDhS. 1, 
9, 24, 6-9 and Gampert, Index, s.v. 

7. See also SamaVidh. 2, 4, 6. 

23. 2. “Blessing” : svastyayana-, see I, 22, 4. — I.e. “removes the evil consequences 

of a bad dream”; duhsvapna - “evil dream” was a kind of evil which was most 
earnestly feared. 



29 


3. In case of a barren woman one shall mutter the (sukta) “start to 
the intoxicated" which lets the unborn child free, and one shall in 
thought meditate upon Indra: (then) the (one's) wife delivers the 
child. 

4. In cases of misfortune, or when one wishes everything one shall 
regularly mutter (the sukta of) the rsi Trita. When a person, having 
bathed, mutters the sukta “Indra", which is addressed to the All- 
gods and contains seven stanzas, 

5. whilst pouring out clarified butter, he is released from all distress. 
— The next sutra is “the beneficent", the excellent, consisting of 
twenty-five stanzas; 

6. having paid homage to the Nasatyas one will obtain the highest 
prosperity. The sukta is a praise of the hot milk oblation and a 
liberator from physical weakness. — 

7. A pure twice-born man shall perpetually mutter the sukta addressed 
to Rudra and (beginning with) “these" : he obtains (a full) life, 
knowledge, wealth, sons, and a house which suffers no loss 

3. RV. 1, 101, addressed to Indra. In st. 1 and 2 the text refers to the defeat 
of the villain Pipru, who was the enemy of Indra’ s protege Rjisvan. St. 1, 
which perhaps is the only part of the sukta meant by the RVidh , reads like 
this : “Start a song of praise to the intoxicated . . ., who caused them that 
were contained in the black womb (the waters contained in the black cavities 
of the clouds, or according to another interpretation the black inhabitants of 
the castles of the enemies) to be born prematurely . . ” 

4. RV. 1, 105, which is ascribed either to Kutsa or to Trita Aptya, deals with 
Trita who has been buried in a well and now is praying to the gods for 
help (st. 17). See Oldenberg’s note, RV. I, p. 123. In st. 2 the sukta reads: 
“they who want anything (get) the object (they want).” — RV. 1, 106; cf. 
especially st. 1 “ . . . deliver us from all distress ( amhas ; the same word is 
in the RVidh.)/’ The same sukta is prescribed by Manu, 11, 255: a sinner 
shall mutter it for half a year. 

5. RV. 1, 112, addressed to the Asvins (= Nasatyau), the young, bright and 
swift gods, who ride in a golden car as harbingers of Usas (Dawn) ; they 
represent the morning light, precede the rise of the sun, are the physicians 
of the gods (the sukta protects from physical weakness; cf. also st. 6 ff.) 
and of benevolent character. — “The beneficent”, apparently the name of 
this sukta: cf. st. 20, where the Asvins are called “the beneficent” (, samtatl ); 
the meaning of this term is discussed by Haradatta, on AsvGS. 2, 8, 11. — 
In 1, 112 the Asvins are praised as speedy helpers and deliverers from distress 
in general. — Hot milk: to the Asvins hot milk (, gharma cf. RV. 1, 112, 
1 and 7 ; the word also denotes the vessel in which it is boiled) is offered ; 
the ceremony, which introduces the soma sacrifice, is called pravargya~\ 
this sukta is used during it (AitBr. 1, 21, 13; Asv£S. 4, 6, 3 etc.). 

7. RV. 1, 114; the 1st stanza reads reads like this: “These sacred thoughts we 
offer to Rudra . . in order that the bipeds and the quadrupeds will be happy 
and all that grows in the village will be free from suffering ( anatiira RVidh. 
has anamaya -); cf. also st. 5; 7; 10. 



30 


24 * 1. with respect to male progeny, offspring and cow-pens, and, in case 

of evil dreams, exemption from pollution. 

With the two stanzas “not the great of us” one shall, after having 
fasted for three days (and being) pure 

2. pour out (into the fire) fuel of the glomerous fig tree, which has 
been prepared (made fit) with sour milk, honey and clarified butter. 
With the sukta one must pour out the clarified butter at the begin- 
ning and the end of the rites. 

3. Urdhvabahu a hundred times praised Bhava with (this) sukta. 
Having cut off all bounds of death one will live free from diseases. — 

4. Standing, holding fuel in the hand, pure, one shall always worship 
the radiant sun when it rises with this sukta : “brightly”. 

5. And if with this excessive praise one regularly invokes (the powers) 
when the sun stands in the meridian, one pushes off (i.e. averts) 
pollution and obtains wealth and (a long) life. — 

25. 1. One must mutter the stanza “therefore with a dream” daily, every 

morning : (with this stanza) one quickly removes (the consequences 
of an) evil dream, and one (will be) free from fear of dearth of 
food. 

2. (The verses) “both, I purify” have formerly been called killers of 
adversaries: muttering them one kills the evil demoniac powers 
(yaksamsi) and one subdues (one's) rivals. 

24. 1. “Pollution” ( rlpra -) ; there is no distinction made between deliverance from 

pollution or uncleanness, from sin, and from curse. RV, 1, 114, 7 and 8: 
“Neither the great nor the small of us, neither the growing up nor the 
strong, neither the father nor the mother you must kill, you shall not injure 
our dear bodies . . . not injure our cattle and horses . . 

2. The tree meant is the udumbara “ficus glomerata”, the wood of which is 
often used for ritual purposes (see, e.g., Macdonell-Keith, I, p. 87). 

3. Urdhvabahu was, according to the tradition, one of the seven sons of Vasistha 
(Visnu Pur. 1, 10; 13 etc.). — Bhava: one of Rudra’s eight names (VisnuPur. 
1, 8, 6 etc. ; see also Pet. Diet. 5, 220 f.). 

4. RV. 1, 115, addressed to the Sun and beginning with the words “Brightly 
the face of the gods has risen, the eye of Mitra, Varuna, Agni.” 

5. Compare, perhaps, RV. 1, 115, 6 “O Gods, to-day, while the sun is rising, 
deliver us from distress (amhas) and calumny ( avadya — Cf. also 2, 35, 
2; 25, 6. 

25 1. RV. 1, 120, 12 “Therefore I do a waj' with (or: I will have none of) a 

dream and a wealthy man who does not delight: both of them disappear 
quickly” (“Die erwartete reiche Daksina ist wie ein Traum, der nicht in 
Erfiillung geht”, Geldner, RV., p. 149). Dearth of food: abhojanad, cf. 

’ blwnjataJi in the RV. text. BD. 3, 139 joins the author of RVidh. in con- 
sidering this stanza destructive of evil dreams; in a similar way, the Anu- 
kramanika. 



31 


3. Having performed the five sacrifices, and having, after accom- 
plishing one's daily ritual work, cast (the oblations) into the fire, 
one will by muttering the (stanza) “you gods in heaven" obtain all 
benefits. 

4. By paying homage to Indra and Visnu with the three (stanzas 
beginning with) “of Visnu, now", one shall, holding fuel in the 
hands, being pure, daily worship : 

5. (then the result will be) dharma, intelligence, wealth, sons, health, 
increase of brahman, and one attains the highest abode, the eternal, 
which consists of light. 

6. (The man) who sees a (person) guilty of assault coming, (or) a tiger, 
or a wolf, is rescued from them when he mutters “....did not 
swallow me". — 

7. After fasting for three days one must mutter at night until the sun 
becomes visible, having bathed and (being) well-prepared for the 
rite, the stanzas addressed to the sun, and worship (that heavenly 
body which) goes by day. 

2. RV. 1, 133, addressed to Indra, who is requested to destroy various kinds of 
evil beings. The 1st stanza reads like this: “Both, heaven and earth I purify 
with the rta (the fundamental 'principle' of settled order, law, truth etc.), 
I burn down all the great fiends, 

3. See e.g. Manu 3, 70 “Teaching (and studying) is the sacrifice (offered) to 
Brahma, the offerings of libations of water or food the sacrifice to the 
ancestors, the oblation with fire the sacrifice to the gods, the bali offering 
i.e. offerings of portions of food to certain divine or semi-divine beings) 
that offered to the bhutas (i.e. goblins, spirits, ghosts etc.), and the hospitable 
reception of guests the offering to men”. Cf. also Manu 3, 71-73; 5, 169 
“one must never neglect the fine (great) sacrifices”; AsvGS. 3, 1, 1-4. 

The text quoted is RV. 1, 139, 11, of which sukta the first stanza is addressed 
to the Visve devah (the All-gods), and the last (11th) invites the gods 
(eleven in heaven, eleven on the earth, eleven in the water) to enjoy the 
offerings. 

4. RV. 1, 154, 1-3, addressed to Visnu and praising his heroic deeds. In st. 1 
the god is said to have supported the upper abode (cf. RVidh. 1, 25, 5). 

6. “Guilty of assault (titatayin -') : the word literally means “a person whose 
bow is drawn (to take another's life)”, but its meaning has in the course of 
time been extended to murderers, incendiaries, thieves, poisoners etc.; see 
F. E. Pargiter, in Sir Asutosh Mookerjee Silver Jubilee Volumes, III, 1, 
p. 37 ff. — The text quoted is RV. 1, 158, 5. This sukta, addressed to the 
Asvins, deals with the legend of Dirghatamas, who, being blind and aged, 
was bound by his attendants and thrown into a river (see BD. 4, 21 ff., and 
cf . Mbh. 1, 104, 22 ff .) ; the water, however, did not drown him. One of the 
attendants, Traitana, tried to kill him with his sword, but in doing so he 
cut to pieces his own head, shoulders and breast. The latter facts are related 
in RV. 1, 158, 5. Another procedure defending oneself against atatayins 
is set forth in the SVidh. 2, 4, 4. 



32 


26. 1. Thieves do not see him, other persons of bad conduct do not either; 

alone he will rescue hundreds from the robbers, whilst being on 
a journey. 

2. A twice-born man who has, through ignorance, committed a theft 
will quickly be freed from (his) guilt, when he has, (being) pure, 
fasted for three days and muttered the sukta beginning with “of 
this lovely”. — 

3. And (the man) who, together with kinsmen, sons, allies and friends, 
wishes to establish a kingdom shall after having restrained himself 
regularly mutter, in his mind, the sukta 

4. “with what beauty?” — (As to the man who) has been guilty of 
slander about teacher, king or brahmans — : after having heard the 
important secret from his teacher Saunaka said: 

5. If one, (being) well-prepared for the rite, mutters these two stanzas 
“this soma”, one obtains all benefits, there will be no sin whatever. — 

6. (Whilst muttering the sukta beginning with) “the nourishment” one 
must regularly worship food that is at one’s disposal: one shall 
regularly honour one’s food and eat it without reviling. 

7. RV. 1, 164, 46 and 47 according to Meyer, but I would suggest identifying 
these stanzas also with other parts of 1, 164, viz. 44, 51, 52 (and perhaps 
also other verses?), in which the sun is (or seems to be) referred to, and 
of which, according to the Anukr. (see also BD. 4, 31 ft. and Sayana’s in- 
troduction to the sukta), the sun is the divinity. . 

26 2. RV. 1, 164, consisting of 52 stanzas; it is a very obscure 'collection of 

riddles’ (see e.g. Whitney-Lanman, II, p. 552) ; in KausS. IS, 25 the 1st 
stanza is quoted in a ceremony for prosperity; AthVPar. 32, 22 reckons it 
to a group of mantras in connection with evil bearing upon water ; Manu 11, 
250 says that even the man who has stolen gold, instantly becomes free 
from guilt, if he mutters this sukta. 

3-4. RV. 1, 165, called the Qrishkta and consisting of a dialogue between Indra, 
who displays his self-confidence and speaks about his exploits, and the 
Maruts. — “Kinsmen” etc. : we might perhaps compare RV. 1, 165, 5 “allying 
ourselves with intimate (friends)”, and st. 7. Calumny etc., see GautDhQ. 21, 
10, where calumnies which will reach (the ears of) the king, an untrue 
accusation brought against a guru etc. are mentioned. 

5. RV. 1, 179, 5-6 "... when we have committed a sin, then he must forgive 
it...”; “...among the gods he (Agastva) reached (the fulfilment of) his 
wishes”. According to the tradition related by BD. 4, 5S ft., a pupil of the 
seer Agastva, who had overheard his teacher speaking with his wife and 
therefore thought that he had committed a sin, asked forgiveness ; his teacher 
and his wife embraced him and said: you are sinless, son. 

6. RV. 1, 187. With this sukta its seer, Agastva, according to BD. 4, 62 
praised food, and the Anukramanika rightly calls it an annastuti- “praise 
of food”. The first stanza reads like this: “Now I shall praise the nourish- 
ment, the mighty supporter of the powerful ...” — The second half of this 
stanza recurs, as to its sense, in Manu 2, 54; the commentaries on that text 



33 


. 1. (Then) a disease caused by food will not (befall) him; even poison 

will become food. And when one has drunk poison one shall mutter 
this sukta which is poison-destroying. 

2. But one must not eat without being reserved in speech, nor when 
one is not pure, nor (eat) disgusting food. And one shall always 
give and worship and offer (oblations in a) pure (state) : 

3. (then) one will be entirely exempt from fear of hunger, (and) one 
will not catch a disease caused by food. — (The man) who has 
arrived at a wrong way, or (who) has lost his way, anywhere, 

4. will get at his way, even when he has done a contemptible (forbidden) 
deed : he must (recite) the sukta “lead, O Agni”, and at each stanza 
pour ghee into the fire. 

5. And muttering and well-prepared he must regularly worship the 
fire. — After having bathed and paid homage to Brhaspati one must 
mutter (the sukta of) the irresistible : (then) 

1. one obtains heroes (sons) and wealth, and one preserves one's 
fame. — The sukta (beginning with) “venomous creature, not" must 
be muttered by (a man) who is afflicted by poison, (he must be) 
well-prepared ; 

2. (then) the poison does not take possession of him, even if it springs 
from a serpent which has poison in its eyes. The venom which is 
in worms and spiders, and (that) which originates in beasts of prey 
and scorpions, 

3. and (poison) which comes from roots and also artificial (poison) : 

hold different views about the term “worship”; according to some of them 
it means “consider as a deity”, or “meditate on its being required to sustain 
life”, according to others “praise it with RV. 1, 187, 1”. See Manu 2, 52 f¥., 
and 7, 217 ss. (“he should eat food, which has been well examined (and 
consecrated) by mantras which destroy poison ...”); ViDh. 3, 88 and other 
texts. — Sayana, referring to Qaunaka for the viniyoga (ritual use) of RV. 
1, 1§7, quotes RVidh. 1, 26, 6-27, 3 I in his introduction to this sukta. 

2. Cf. Manu 2, 53. 

3-4. RV. 1, 189, which is addressed to Agni, and asks for protection from various 
afflictions ; the first stanza reads like this : “Lead us, O Agni, by a good way 
to wealth, thou god knowing all the ways. Remove from us the sin (enas) 
that leads us astray . . 

'.5-28.1. RV. 1, 190, which, being addressed to Brhaspati (see 1, 5, 3), ends with a 
request for heroes (sons) and cows. — “Fame” (suslokya-) : cf. st. 4 his (i.e. 
Brhaspati) fame goes to heaven, to earth”. 

1. RV. 1, 191, which is a charm against invisible venomous insects and their 
venom. According to BD. 4, 64 Agastya, in fear of poison, saw this sukta 
as an antidote. The first word, quoted in the RVidh., viz. kankata means 
“hair-comb”, but Sayana’s commentary on the RV. holds that it here denotes 
a venomous snake. 


3 



all (that) he destroys by muttering (this sukta). — Dharma, intel- 
ligence, wealth, sons, happiness, spiritual pre-eminence, 

4. health, prosperity, longevity, cattle, knowledge, great glory: having 
fasted for three days, having bathed, (being) well-prepared for the 
rite (and) having accomplished a vrata (vow or act of devotion), 

5. and performed a hundred(fold) restraining of the breath, one must 
worship Satakratu, for one day, furnished with a razor, putting 
together one's feet, reserved in speech, 

1. calling to mind the rsi Grtsamada by means of the sukta (beginning 
with) “who born". A hundred times one must mutter this (sukta) 
and at last the stanza “Indra, most excellent". 

2. After one day one obtains property, after two days the highest 
success, after three days health, after four (days) plenty of food, 

3. after five spiritual preeminence, after six a life which brings 
pleasure, after seven sons, prosperity, after eight one will acquire 
glory, 

4. and one becomes dear to Indra and reaches a dear residence. — 
Quilling adversaries, appeasing’ the dasyus, causing an excessive 

increase of wealth , 

3. “Spiritual preeminence, spiritual illumination , preeminence in sacred 
knowledge” : brahmavarcasa-. 

3-4. Cf. above, I, 25, 5. These two half-verses, which lack a verb at first sight 
appear to have been interpolated by someone who ascribed these results to 
the rites mentioned ; they may, however, introduce the following five stanzas. 

5. £atakratu (“he whose strength of mind or power is hundredfold”) : Indra. 
— Razor : on razors in ancient India : Macdonell-Keith, I, 209 f . ; in general : 
Hdwtb. deutsch. Abergl. VII, 509. But see especially SVidh. 2, 5, 4 and 5. 

1. RV. 2, 12, which, being addressed to Indra, belongs to a series of suktas 
seen by the rsi Grtsamada; this beautiful sukta praises Indra’s exploits and 
proclaims his power. According to BD. 4, 64 IT. Grtsamada, having warded 
off the attack of two demons by reciting this sukta — Indra’s deeds being 
thus proclaimed fear entered them, and the god seeing his opportunity, struck 
them down — , and obtaining permission to ask a boon of Indra, requested 
him to give “security for our bodies, speech that stirs the heart, heroes and 
wealth . . ” ; then they went together to Indra’s abode. — “Indra . * ” : 
RV. 2, 21, 6, also seen by G. and addressed to I. : it runs as follows : “Indra, 
give as the most excellent goods, wisdom and adroitness of mind, prosperity, 
increase of wealth, security for our bodies, sweetness of speech, auspicious 
days”. — Cf. Meyer, p. XIX. 

4. RV. 2, 23, addressed to Brahmanaspati (= Brhaspati), who is represented 
as counteracting various foes and evil influences such as persons “hostile 
to brahman” (4), distress, disaster, hostile demons, persons speaking with 
double tongue, envious people, and so on (5 ; 7 ; 8, 10) ; he is a herd, who 
gives goods. — Dasyus are enemies of the gods, superhuman, "barbarian’ or 
"outcast’ unbelievers. 



35 


5. (is) the sukta “of the hosts”, — one must mutter that, (it is) an 
increaser of comfort. One shall mutter this (sukta) well-prepared 
at the two twilight-times, (and) regularly worship 

1. Brhaspati with (this) sukta in order to (obtain) an abundance of all 
benefits. —4 By muttering this stanza “who me king”, which 
appeases evil dreams 

2. a pure brahman quickly destroys (the consequences of) an evil 
dream. — After fasting a day and a night a great knower of 
brahman, (who has) restrained (himself) 

3. shall, in order to obtain offspring, pour into the fire (one portion 
of) clarified butter or rice boiled in milk with these five (stanzas) 
beginning with “Raka I” at the sixth day of the light half of 
the month: 

4. after eating himself the leavings of the oblation he obtains a 
numerous offspring. — (The man) who has fallen a victim to a 
violent disease which might take his life 

5. must, with the sukta “to thee” which is dedicated to Rudra, after 
fasting the single fourteenth day of the dark half of the month, at 
each stanza pour out into the fire a mess of boiled rice, (being) 
reserved in speech and pure. 

1. Having first poured out oblations of clarified butter and then wor- 
shipped Sankara he shall, every other meal (and) unwearied, subsist 
on the leavings of the oblation : 

2. when the moon is full he will overcome death and be released from 
diseases. — (The man) who through ignorance becomes infamous 
or who does a censured deed, 

3. must, after bathing and without eating, in the water (and) unwearied 
mutter the stanza “O dearest mother”. — (The man) who having 


1. RV. 2, 28, 10: “(the stanza) addressed to Varuna beginning “Who me” is 
destructive of evil dreams and the like” (BD. 4, *83). It reads like this : “If 
a related (allied) person or a friend in speaking strikes fear into me, who 
am timid, o king (Varuna), or if a thief or a wolf tries to injure us, do 
you, Varuna, protect us from that”. 

3. RV. 2, 32, 4-8. This second part of the sukta is addressed to female 
divinities, to wit to Raka and Simvali who, in later Vedic texts, are connected 
with the phases of the moon (see also Keith, R. Ph. p. 199; 201; 355), but 
in this ^ukta are requested to give sons or offspring respectively. Guhgu, 
mentioned in st. 8, is otherwise unknown. 

5. RV. 2, 33, addressed to Rudra. Cf. st. 2 “By the most salutary medicines, 
given by thee, O Rudra, I would live to see a hundred winters . . ; 
4 “...thou art the best physician”; 7; 12; 13. 

1. Qamkara, see above (I, 18, 6). 



36 


set out on a journey sees, on the way, an ominous bird coming forth, 

4. be it unauspicious or auspicious, shall stand, look and mutter (in 
a) well-prepared (state) ; then he shall worship the sound with the 
two suktas (beginning with) “with repeated cry”. 

5. Even when one does not see the bird, or also the crow, the animal 
of the forest, or even the beast of prey, this (sukta) which perplexes 
robbers must be muttered. 

II 

1. 1. Whether it be a being which gives out an auspicious sound or 

whether it be another being or something that does not roar or is 
not visible — he must mutter it after paying homage: (then) he 
turns back successful. 

2. He has nothing to fear of dasyus (robbers, barbarians, impious men 
etc.), anywhere on his way; and he gets through' (surmounts) the 
difficulties (impassable or narrow passages, dangers etc.), he will 
be prosperous and happy. — 

3. (The man) whose food is not digested, or (if it) does not remain 
in any way (in his stomach), must after meditating upon the getting 
rid of the food mutter the stanza “I am Agni”. — 

3. RV- 2, 41, 16 is addressed to the celebrated river goddess Sarasvati (see 
e.g., Macdonell, V.M., p. 86 ss.): “O dearest mother, best of the rivers, 
best of the goddesses, S,, we feel unrenowned, grant us reputation, mother”. 

4. Charms against ominous birds (sakuna-) such as pigeons, owls and black 
birds are also found in the AthV. (6, 27-29 — RV. 10, 165, see farther on : 
4, 20, 2; and 7, 64). KausS. 46, 7 describes the rites resorted to against the 
evil influence of a bird of ill omen (Caland, Zauberritual, p, 150 f.). 

The suktas referred to are RV. 42 and 43, belonging to the series seen by 
Grtsamada and called, in the Anukramanika, “praise of a bird which shrieks 
on one’s way”. According to a tradition handed down by the BD. (4, 93 s.), 
Indra, desiring to be praised became a francolin partridge, and taking up 
a position on the right quarter of the rsi as he was about to set out, uttered 
a cry; G., however, recognizing him in the form of the bird, praised him 
with RV. 2, 42 and 43. (See also Macdonell, BD. II, p. 150 s.)- In these 
suktas an ominous bird is invoked to give auspicious signs. — See also 
A, Kuhn, in Weber’s Ind, Studien I, 1850, p. 118. — Instead of “(worship) 
the sound (svaram)" most mss. have “himself” {svayam). 

II 

1 1. and 2. belong to the last stanzas of the first chapter. 

3. RV. 3, 26, 7. The deity addressed in this sukta is Agni Vaisvanara (“Agni 
relating or belonging to all men, the omnipresent or universal Agni”). In st. 7 
the god himself says : “ . . . the ghee (the clarified butter, used for religious 
purposes) is my eye, in my mouth it becomes amrta (the draught of immor- 



37 


4. One must mutter the conversation of Visvamitra when one passes 
over a river. After having, according to the ritual rule, bathed and 
rinsed the mouth, one must throw forth a handful of water, 

5. saying: “Homage to the streams !” Who performs this regularly, 
him the rivers and the streams protect like mothers their own son. 

1. And even (when travelling) on ways at the banks of rivers he need 
not be afraid of beings living in water, and he is not oppressed 
by cold and heat (things). 

2. (A person) who wishes to pass over a swollen river must call to 
mind the stanza “stand still”. The twice-born man, who, when he 
passes over a river, in the midst of the water mutters the stanza 
“forthwith”, 

3. reaches the bank or finds a shallow place within a brief space of 
time. He who with a yoked chariot wishes quickly to gain the 
opposite bank of the water, 

4. shall, being himself restrained, mutter this stanza: “upwards the 
wave”. And (the man) who has, in the same way, set out on a 
journey shall recollect the sukta “with the charming”: 

5. Having completely accomplished his business he gets home again. ■ — 
The sukta “Indra and Parvata” is traditionally held to be a giver 
of long life and property. — 

tality) . . .”. Cf. Nir. 13, 14, and, especially, Sayana (introduction to the 
sukta) who remarks that Agni or the Highest Brahman is the divinity, 
Brahman the € x§? of this stanza. 

4. The famous rsi Visvamitra was the domestic priest of king Sudas, a more 
or less historical warrior in Vedic times. According to the BD. (4, 105 ff.) 
and other sources he, when going with the king to the confluence of the 
rivers Vipas and Qutudri, addressed them to make them propitious and 
succeeded in taking across the king’s army by inducing the rivers to lower 
their surface. The dialogue in which the rsi and the rivers engaged is handed 

1 down RV. 3, 33. 

5. Meyer rightly remarks that rivers are elsewhere called ambit ama^ and 
mairtamcL* “very motherly”. 

2. “Stand still” (in this way Visvamitra addresses the rivers) : RV. 3, 33, 5. 
“Forthwith” : RV. 3, 33, 9. In these stanzas Visvamitra induces the rivers 
to give an easy crossing to the king’s army. 

4. “Upwards the wave . . .” i.e. “The wave shall push upwards the pins of 
the yoke etc.” RV. 3, 33, 13. Geldner, RV. (Ausw.), p. 336 remarks : “Bitte 
fur einen bei der Durchfahrt im Flusse stecken bleibenden Wagen. Diese 
wurde wegen der ahnlichen Situation der Ballade angehangt.” — RV. 3, 45, 
addressed to Indra, begins in this way: “Come, O Indra, with the charming 
steeds . . . ; let nobody detain you ; pass them by like (a traveller passes) a 
desert” (st. 1). 

5. “Indra and Parvata” : RV. 3, 53, which is addressed to Indra. Parvata, 
“Mountain” is sometimes mentioned as a companion of Indra. In st. 5 Indra 



38 


6. Having slain a man who does not give’ (an avaricious man), (but 
who is) well-furnished with property and whose mind has always 
been possessed, one may be after his wealth’ (try to obtain) by 
recalling to mind “of what use” ? 

3. 1. (The man) . . . who, (being) bewildered in voice or organs of sense, 

does not (cannot) learn (objects of) knowledge, or who is entirely 
ignorant of the objects of the organs of sense according to the facts, 

2. or to whom the knowledge he has acquired is lost again and again 
— muttering, for two months, the two stanzas (beginning with) 
Sasarpari, he obtains it. 

3. When (a man who) has set out with a cart recalls to mind the four 
(verses beginning with) “the two oxen (must be) strong” : — having 
attained his objects with strong cart and men he goes in good 
condition. 

4. A twice-born man who states that the end of the axle of his waggon 
has broken off on a way which is hard to go over, shall mutter the 
two verses “wrap yourself into” which give strength to the axles. 

is called vurghavan - “bountiful” ; in st. 7 mention is made of liberality and 
a long life, in 13 the author gives expression to the wish that Indra will 
be bountiful. 

6. The stanza meant is RV. 3, 53, 14: “Of what use are the cows in the 
country of the Kikatas to you?... Bring near the property of Prama- 
ganda.. ” According to Sayana (see Geldner, RV. Ausw., p. 355). P. was 
the king of the K. “Jedenfalls handelt es sich urn ein feindliches Volk, das 
nicht offert... und um Aufteilung (seines) Herdenreichtums” (Geldner). 
Manu 11, 15 states that one may take (by force etc.) from a person who 
always takes and never gives. Similar statements: Gaut. 18, 24 ss. 

3. l_2. The stanzas are RV. 3, 53, 15 and 16. According to Sadgurusisya on 
RV, 3, S3 and BD. 4, 112 ss. £akti, a son of Vasistha, gained the victory 
over Visvamitra in a dispute during a great sacrifice of Sudas, and deprived 
him of consciousness, so that he sank down. But the Jamadagnis gave him 
Speech called Sasarpari, daughter of Brahma or of the Sun, and this Speech 
dispelled the loss of consciousness. And gladdened at heart by receiving her 
Visvamitra paid homage to the Jamadagnis and praised Speech with the 
two stanzas mentioned, in which Sasarpari is said to drive away amaii- (“loss 
of consciousness, deficiency of intellect”) and to have made Visvamitra’ s clan 
famous. 

3. The stanzas meant are RV. 3, 53, 17-20, with which Visvamitra, according 
to BD. 4, 116, praised the parts of the cart and the oxen, as he went home. 
The stanzas begin in this way: “The two oxen must be strong and the axle 
firm; let the pole not break off, let the yoke not go to pieces”; in st. 18 
Indra is requested to give strength to the draught-oxen, etc. The Anukra- 
manika calls these four verses a rathangastuti “praise of the parts of the 
cart”. 

4. The stanzas are ibid. 19 and 20, in which the axle, the firm bearer of the 
cart, is addressed like this: “Wrap yourself into the firmness of the khadira- 



39 


5. Having, on the fourteenth day of the dark half of the month, fasted 
for three days (and being) pure one shall, standing on a cemetery 
or burial-place for the bones of cremated corpses (smasana-), on a 
spot which is sloping towards the south (being) concentrated, 

1. wearing a red headband and carrying a sword in the hand, with 
fuel coming from the bilva-tree, eating wind (living on air), for 
seven days pour out mustard-oil (into the fire) to which salt has 
been added, 

2. (and) logs of w'ood coming from the rajavrksa - (the royal tree’), 
whilst reciting (the verses) which express the hatred for the 
Vasisthas. Whom he hates, having made of him, at night, an image 
(of wood) of the samydka - (cathartocarpus fistula Pers.), 

3. a twice-born man shall, using that (image), perform a sacrifice with 
(these) four stanzas, whilst enunciating the name: “this (person) is 
the oblation” — within a week he will die. 

4. This sacred text (brahma) recited by the Kusika at last kills the 
Vasisthas. Nobody is safe from him when he mutters (it) and offers 
oblations. - — 

5. The excellent sukta, consisting of twenty-two (stanzas) which refers 
to the Self (or individual : dtman -) one must, being well-prepared, 
regularly mutter on the days of the changes of the moon: (then) 
one obtains the benefits one wishes for. — 

1. (One must) daily (honour) Brhaspati, Ajasva, Savitar, Babhru and 
the Rtavrdhs with five series of three stanzas every day; 

wood . . . Axle, be firm, strong, and strengthened . . . Let ns not break this 
journey (untimely). (Lead) us happily home!...” 

.5-4.4 The stanzas meant in 4.2 are RV. 3, 53, 21-24, which “are traditionally held 
to be hostile to the Vasisthas” (BD. 4, 117). These verses which were 
pronounced by Visvamitra (who was a descendant of Kusika) are considered 
as ‘imprecations’, as hostile to enemies and magical incantations (BD. 4, 118). 
The authorities among the Vasisthas are unanimous on the injurious effect 
of these verses on this family; they will not listen to them and great evil 
arises, they say, from listening to them or repeating them: the children of 
those who do so will die and so on (BD. 4, 119 f.). On these stanzas see 
Macdonell, BD. II, p. 158 (st. 117 notes); Geldner, RV. (Ausw\), p. 356. In 
st. 21 is reads . . . “(The man) who hates us (shall be) defeated, and whom 
we hate, let his breath quit him”. KausS. 48, 37 uses it (as AV. 7, 31) in a 
magical ceremony against enemies, while laying on the fire fuel from a tree 
struck by lightning. Compare also such rites as described in SVidh. 2, 5. 

5. “Twenty-two” : both the suktas 3, 54 and 3, 55 consisting of 22 stanzas and 
both being dedicated to a variety of gods it is not easy to see which is 
meant. As 55 is a so-called ‘enigmatic hymn’ (see Gonda, Brahman, p. 57 ff.) 
the scale is turned in favour of the latter. 

1. “Five series of three-” : RV. 3, 62, 4—18. This sukta consists of six triplets 


40 


2. (with the stanza beginning with) “0 Brhaspati” one shall for five 
days pour out ghee at every stanza. Having poured out (the 
oblations) into the fire, and having honoured with fragrances and 
garlands together with perfumes — 

3. the same five gods honour (the man who does thus) with (these) 
five benefits: riches, children, cattle, occasions of joy and a long 
life. — 

6. 1. Now I shall proclaim that producer of grace, the correct rule about 

the gayatri, the first sacred verse of the Veda, which grants dharma, 
artha, kama and moksa. 

2. There does not exist in respect of the triad of obligatory, occasional 
and optional (ceremonies) a final aim higher than the gayatri 
neither in this world nor hereafter. 

3. Eating limited (portions of) food that is fit for a sacrifice, keeping 
silence, quite intent upon bathing and praising thrice (viz. at dawn, 
noon, and sunset), a wise man shall mutter (it) three hundred 
thousand (times), without other occupations of his mind. 

4. Afterwards, he combines (them) with rites, (and that) gradually or 
according to his own wish; before he shall perform the ritual act, 
he must not break that observance. 

5. After having bathed at the rising of the sun he shall mutter a 
thousand times every day: he (then) certainly obtains a long life, 
health, supremacy (superhuman power) and wealth. 

addressed to Indra-Varuna, Brhaspati, Pusan (the god “who has goats for 
horses” Ajasva), Savitar, Soma (designated as “the tawny one” Babhru in 
RgVidh. : the adjective babhru-, is often applied to the soma beverage), 
Mitra and Varuna (called “the increasers of the sacred principle of law 
and truth fr/fl-)” respectively. 

2. RV. 3, 62, 4 begins with “0 Brhaspati”. “Wealth” or “treasures” are 
mentioned in st. 4. 

6. 1. Gayatri, in general any stanza composed in the gayatri metre, but especially 

the very sacred verse RV. 3, 62, 10, to be repeated by every brahman at his 
morning and evening devotions. — Dharma, etc. : see also V, 2, 3. Dharma 
(eternal norm or law and observance or prescribed conduct founded on it), 
artha (“advantage, utility”, material condition of life), kama (“desire, enjoy- 
ment”, esp. “sexual love”) are, besides moksa (final emancipation), the 
threefold fulfilment of duties to be striven after by a Hindu. 

2. Constant, ordinary or obligatory (ittfya-) ceremonies are opposed to those 
occasioned by some particular cause and from the optional rites performed 
through the desire of some object or personal advantage. 

S. By the Gayatri the person speaking asks to receive the excellent (desirable) 
splendour of the god Savitar (the Sun) which is expected to inspire (drive 
on) his thoughts. Hence its other name Savitri. As to its use in various rites 
see, e.g., Gampert, ox,, Index. 



41 


1. Having correctly fasted for three days and having offered ghee by 
thousands (of portions) one obtains a thousandfold gain, when the 
fire (into which the oblations are poured out) is (kept up) with fuel 
consisting of khadira-wood. 

2. When at (the time of) the conjunction of Rahu and the sun, (the 
fire is kept burning by means) of fuel coming from the palasa 
anointed with ghee in the fire one obtains a thousandfold gain. 

3. By pouring out, at (the time of) the conjunction of Rahu and the 
moon, red sandal (together) with ghee into a fire (kindled with) 
khadira-wood one obtains thousand(fold) gold. 

4. By pouring out cow-dung (together) with ghee and mixed with red 
sandal into the fire, a twice-born man obtains a thousand herds 
of cows. 

5. He acquires that cow, with the dung of which he has, by thousands, 
sacrificed globes in the fire (the fuel of which has been) anointed 
with ghee. 

1 . By means of barley-corns one will obtain horses, by sesamum-seeds 
elephants and by barley-food buffalo-cows, by an oblation of rice- 
grains one will obtain a daughter. 

2. By sacrificing, by thousands, flowers of the jati, the campaka, and 
the rajarka, in the fire, (the fuel of which has been) anointed with 
ghee, one obtains clothes. 

3. By offering, by thousands, (oblations of) water in the orb of the 

1. Khadira: acacia catechu, which is frequently used in magic: long life is 
aimed at by offering nails of khadira wood; its very name is held to make 
it fit to devour (. khad -) enemies (AthV. 8, 8, 3); it may serve to make an 
amulet (Ath. V. 10, 6, 6). I refer to V. Henry, La Magie dans lTfrde 
Antique, Paris 1909, p. 91 f. See also AVPar. 23, 6, 5. 

2. Palasa: butea frondosa (see Henry, o.c., Index p. 282), which, according to 
the QatBr. 1, 3, 3, 19 and other texts (see Eggeling, £atBr. I, p. 90(, n. 1) 
is brahman. It is considered the best wood for kindling the sacrificial fire. — 
Fuel anointed with ghee: see also AthVPar. 30 b, 1, 16; 26, 3, 4. 

Rahu : the demon who is supposed to seize the sun and the moon and thus 
causes eclipses. In astronomy he is among other things regarded as the 
ascending node of the moon (or point where the moon intersects the ecliptic 
in passing northwards), or as a planet. 

3. Red sandal : the wood or the unctuous preparation of it was highly esteemed 
as perfume (see, e.g.. Ram. 2, 33, 9). 

4. For the ritual use of cow-dung see Scheftelowitz, ZDMG. 75 (1921), p. 39 f . ; 
Meyer, Trilogie, II, p. 50; 93 f. 

L Sesamum: see Meyer, Trilogie, Register, s.v. (Ill, p. 319 f.) ; Gampert, o.c., 
Index, s.v. (p. 277). 

2. The jati is the jasminum grandiflorum, the campaka the michelia campaka, 
the rajarka the calotropis gigantea. 



42 


sun (when it shines) in the water one will acquire a thousand golden 
objects, silver when (one) pours it out into (the orb) of the moon. 

4. Whoever bathes with water upon which he has muttered (the 
gayatri) a thousand times, is released from impurity, disease, and 
vinayakas, when he is afflicted with bad luck and evil. 

5. The quarter of the sky which one reaches by hurling a clod of earth 
upon which (this stanza) has been muttered seven times, (there) 
danger caused by thieves, fire or wind, does not occur, 

9. 1. Subsisting on milk one must mutter a hundred thousand times: 

(then) one keeps off accidental death. Eating ghee (and doing so) 
one will obtain mental power and a large quantity’ of intellect. 

2. By pouring out leaves of the rattan, into a fire (kindled with fuel 
which has been) anointed with ghee, one can,. as a result of a 
hundred thousand (oblations and mutterings) have the god who 
rules over the whole earth make rain ; (there is) no doubt. 

3. By a hundred thousand ash-oblations’ a krtya rises from the water. 
Turned to the sun, standing in water which reaches up to the navel, 
pure, 

4. with a hundred thousand oblations of sesamum-seed in a fire (kept 
burning by means) of (fuel) which (has been) smeared with ghee 
one will obtain the highest success and one[’s self] will be endowed 
with all benefits. 

4. Here, as in other texts, the Vinayakas are regarded as demons who cause 
evil, disease and misfortune, and who are to be propitiated and exorcized 
by special rites. See Dresden, Manavagrhyasutra, p. 158. 

9 2. Although the form varsapaycd , given by the mss., is not mentioned in the 

dictionaries and manuals, Meyer’s conjecture vardhapaycd "to cause to grow 
or increase” seems unnecessary, the causatives in -apayati being frequent 
in later Sanskrit and indefinitely productive in Middle India, and Pali having 
vassapcti "to cause to rain”. — The vetasa- “rattan, calamus rotarig”, being 
an aquatic plant, belongs to the various plants connected, in rites and popular 
belief, with water. Hence it is instrumental in obtaining rain: when one 
desires rain one may, e.g., perform the ^anror-sacrifice, for which fuel and 
straw of the vetasa are required. — The god meant is Indra. 

3. A krtya is a kind of female evil spirit or deity (or even a sorceress), to 
whom sacrifices are offered for magical and destructive purposes. In the 
Mbh. (13, a. 93) Vrsadarbhi, angered at the rejection of his offering, produced 
a krtya, whom he called (a) Yatudhani, from the fire, and asked her to kill 
a group of rsis. — For the important ritual function of ashes, which represent 
a mighty purificatory power, see J. J. Meyer, Trilogie, p. 107 ff. ; Hdwtb. 
deutsch. Abergl. I, 611 ff. 

4. AthVPar. 30 a and b deal with the ceremony consisting of a hundred 
thousand oblations with the savitri-stanza, The rewards obtained are not 
the same. 



43 


5. With a hundred thousand oblations of barley-corns (poured out) 
in (to) a fire (burning by means of fuel) which (has been) smeared 
with ghee one will reach the highest abode and one[’s self] will 
be endowed with all benefits. 

0. 1. With a hundred thousand oblations of ghee one will obtain all 

benefits. Whilst feeding on the five products of the cow one shall 
mutter a hundred thousand times : then one will be able to recollect 
one’s former existences. 

2. Having offered the same (viz. objects of value, movable property 
etc.) in the fire one acquires objects of value in manifold form; 
and as a result of an oblation of food (offered) regularly, there will 
always be food. 

3. One shall offer oblations (consisting) of all appropriate objects to 
the number of a myriad. By pouring red mustard-seeds into the 
fire one subdues all (one’s) adversaries. 

4. By pouring out salt together with honey one will become powerful 
over all. By offering red fragrant oleanders one will cause fever. 

5. By pouring out oil of the vibhltaka one will expel (one’s enemy) 
from the country. By pouring out leaves of the nimba (nimb tree) 
one will give rise to hatred among men. 

6. After having offered red (reddened) rice-grains in the fire (the 
fuel of which is) smeared with ghee, one obtains strength; (then) 
one it not subdued by (one’s) enemies. 

0. 1. “The five products of the cow” (pancagavya-), to wit milk, sour milk, butter, 

urine, and dung. — As to the effect of the rite cf. AthVPar. 42, 2, 13. 

3. Mustard brings luck (cf. AthVPar. 4, 1, 23) and is often used in rites (see, 
e.g., id. 1, 45, 8; Var. BS. 48, 35, where also other ingredients are enumera- 
ted) ; it is a means of protection (Mark. Pur. 31, 51 prescribes strewing the 
ground with sesamum seed and siddharthaka -). The word, which is derived 
from siddhartha- “successful”, properly denotes the white mustard. — The 
meaning of the red colour has been illustrated by Meyer, o.c., see III, p. 317 
s.v. Rot. It is the magical colour. 

4. Salt, probably on account of its preservative qualities, is often used in charms ; 
it is held to ward off demons, to purify, and so on. AthVPar. 35, 1, 10 ss., 
whilst prescribing oblations of black mustard with various substances to bring 
about the destruction of a family, or to cause epilepsy and so on, has salt 
used to produce fever; to a similar effect id. 36, 10, 2. See J. J. Meyer, 
o.c. Ill, p. 317 ; for honey I refer to the same book, III, p. 301 ; see also 
Henry, M. Index, p. 284 and 281; ERE. Ill, 444; Index Vol. 517; VI, 770 L; 
Hdwtb. deutsch. Abergl. VII, 897. 

5. AthVPar. 36, 5, 3 the vibhitaka is mentioned among the trees fit to ruin 
an adversary (esp. by causing him to quit his occupation etc. by means of 
magical incantations) ; itccatona The word pracatayet in IWidh. must mean 
“expel”. For nimba-1 eaves see J. J. Meyer, o.c., II, p. 33. 


44 


11. 1. (That man)’s evil shall be allayed who, for the sake of success in 

recovering (restoring) pours out cow-milk into an ignited fire 
together with honey and clarified butter. 

2. If a man of chaste conduct {brahmacarh !-) who subsists on limited 
food mutters (it) three thousand times, he no doubt acquires, in the 
course of a year, -wealth and supremacy (superhuman powers). 

3. By offering in the fire fuel and flowers of the sami, the bilva, the 
palasa, and especially of the arka one will acquire a golden object. 

4. If (a person), who resorts to a sanctuary of the Water, Brahma, 
Tryambaka and so on, abstaining from food, mutters (it) a hundred 
thousand times, (then) that god will be ready to fulfil his requests. 

5. By means of a hundred thousand offerings of bilvas (the fuel of 
which has been) smeared with ghee, (poured out) into the fire (a 
man) acquires the highest fortune (welfare, wealth, high rank etc. : 
srl-), if he is not a killer of an embryo. 

12. 1. By means of a hundred thousand oblations of lotus flowers (sacri- 

ficed) in a fire (kindled by means of fuel) smeared with ghee 
one acquires an entire kingdom, without rivals and troubles 
(enemies etc.). 

2. By means of two million and five hundred thousand, and by feeding 
on sour milk, milk and ghee a person becomes perfect as to his own 
body, as has been thought right by Kausika. 

3. For one day eating the five products of the cow, for one day 
subsisting on wind, for one day eating food (given by) brahmans, 
(this conduct) is called the muttering of the gayatri. 

4. Having bathed (whilst muttering) a hundred gayatrls one shall 
mutter a hundred in the water, then after drinking water (whilst 
muttering another) hundred one is freed from all sins (, to wit) : 

11. 3. The sami has a very tough hard wood, the bilva (bel, aegle marmelos) is 

the wood-apple, the arka the Calotropis gigantea. 

4. Tryambaka i.e. Rudra-£iva. 

5. “Killer of an embryo”: the most wicked criminal (see Gampert, p. 30 ff. ; 
62 ff.); the term very often also applies to the killer of a brahman. — 
Gold is the reward attached to the offering of bilva AthVPar. 31, 6, 4. 

12. 1. “Without rivals and without troubles” see e.g. AthV. Par. 1, 45, 8, and, 

above, 1, 17, 3. 

2. Kausika was an ancient teacher (BarUp. 2, 6, 1; 4, 6, 1), RVKh. 3, 17, 5 
he is identified with the famous sage Visvamitra, one of the seven great rsis ,* 
see above II, 1, 4; 3, 5-4, 4. This name also occurs AthVPar. 23, 9, 4; 29, 
2, 2, etc. (see also p. 581), and, especially, 49, 4, 9 where the 72 Atharva- 
vedaparisistas are attributed to Kausika. He is also the reputed diasceuastcs 
of the KausS. See Bloomfield, Atharvaveda, p. 13; 16 f. 



45 


5. The killer of a cow, the killer of (his own) father, the killer of 
(his own) mother, the killer of a brahman, the man who violates his 
teacher's bed, the robber of gold and jewels and the twice-born man 
who drinks spirituous liquor, 

6. (the man) who has performed a sacrifice for a person for whom it 
is not permitted to sacrifice, or who has done a contemptible deed. 
Even should he hold the earth together with the ocean he would 
not become wearied. 

7. And the planets, viz. the sun and others in this world, the position 
of which is unfavourable to him on earth, they all become auspicious 
and gentle to him ; there is no doubt. — 

1. Whoever mutters the sukta “make" which kills the raksas, will take 
away the life of (his) enemies, (even) when he is surrounded by 
dasyus, and he will also destroy the raksas. 

2. Who daily worships the fire with (the stanza) “round”, him the 
fire voluntarily protects from all sides, turning its face everywhere. 

3. Who with the sukta “who to-day” regularly praises Sakra or mut- 
ters it together with adorations, obtains from Indra the fulfilment 
of wishes. 

4. With (the sukta) “with which”, seen by Vamadeva, one must per- 
form a blessing ceremony during the night. Or one must at the 
hours of twilight mutter that sacred text communicated by Kusika. 


6. The second half of this stanza is, apart from a synonym for “earth*, identical 
with AthV. Par. 41, 3, 11 ab; vs. 7 may be compared with id. 11 cd, 12 ab. 
AthVPar. deals with a ritual for the twdlight-w'orship with the Savi tri- 
stanza, and states the importance and efficacy of the ceremony. 

7. “In the world, on earth**: AthVPar. has a better reading. 

1. Cf. I, 20, 2. — The text quoted is RV. 4, 4, addressed to Agni raksohan- 
“the killer of evil beings or demons ( raksas )**. See e.g. st. 1 “pierce the 
raksas with your most burning (arrows)"; 4 “bum down the enemies** ; “burn 
down him who has done malicious deeds (arati-; the same wurd, which can 
denote the doer of evil, be it an enemy or an evil spirit who frustrates the 
good intentions of man and disturbs his happiness)**. 

2. “Round" : RV. 4, 9, 8 “your (Agnfs) chariot shall reach us on all sides, 
with which you protect the persons offering**. 

3. “Who to-dav*’ : RV. 4, 25, addressed to Indra (~ (Takra). Cf. st. 2 “who 
bows with words to the soma-loving (= Indra)?’*. In st. 1 there is question 
of Indra’s friendship and help, in 2 of his companionship and assistance. 

4. “With which’*: RV. 4, 31, seen by Vamadeva and addressed to Indra. 
“Blessing ceremony” (svastyayana -) ; a rite or means of attaining prosperity 
etc.’*. In the sukta referred to there is question of Indra*s help, liberality 
etc. In st. 15 Surya (the Sun) is addressed, and 5 c “I have obtained a 
share in the (rising) suri* refers to sunrise; hence, I suppose, the nightly 
performance of the rite in RVidh. — Kusika : Meyer remarks : “fidem 



46 


5. With the stanza “the swan which dwells in the brightness (in light)” 
one must, at the time of death, (in a) pure (state) look at the sun : 
muttering (it) one goes to the eternal residence of Brahman. — 

6. Who is occupied with agriculture shall according to the rule pour 
out (into the fire) a sthalipaka (a kind of cooked offering) in the 
midst of the field (muttering) the five stanzas (beginning with) 
“prosperously the steers”. 

7. And the ploughman shall guide(?) the plough according to the 
characteristic marks (indications): to Indra and to the Maruts, to 
Parjanya and to Bhaga, 

14. 1. to Pusan, to the corn and the furrow; the next, moreover, is 

Sunaslra. After having sacrificed to them one by one he shall 
worship these divinities (collectively) 

2. with presents of perfumes and wreaths and with fruits, parched 

nomini illi Kugiki ne attribuas cave; ultimus hie padus perfrequens invenitur 
in libris generis certi”. Kusika was the reputed father or grandfather of 
Visvamitra; see II, 12, 2. — Now papemasanam “destroying the evil or the 
wicked” seems to be the better reading. 

5. The text meant is RV. 4, 40, 5. The sukta 4, 40 is addressed to Dadhikra, 
which is a famous divine horse in Vedic mythology. In st. 5 D. is spoken of 
as a swan (hamsa-) dwelling in light, as the vasu (god of a particular group) 
in the air, as the hotar at the vedi (altar), the guest in the house etc. 
According to the commentaries and BD. 5, 3 the sun is meant and in AitBr. 
4, 20, 5 this stanza is connected with the sun (“he that gives heat yonder”), 
which is “hard to mount”; but, the text adds, the difficult mounting, which 
is the world of heaven, can be performed by means of the text RV. 4, 40, 5. 
In the stanza Agni is, however, meant; cf. also QatBr. 6, 7, 3, 11. In the 
Upanisads this verse is often quoted as an argument in favour of the identity 
of the human soul and brahman. 

6. “Prosperously the steers”: RV. 4, 57, 4-8. RV. 4, 57, seen by Vamadeva is 
addressed to Ksetrapati (st. 1-3), “the Lord or deity of the field”, who is 
invoked to give cattle etc. Quna (st. 4) and Qunasirau (5; 8) which in all 
probability represent the ‘Ackersegen’ and ploughing (or the ploughshare 
and the plough), and (st. 6-7) Slta “Furrow”. According to BD. 5, 9-10 the 
8th stanza ‘pr a i ses ’ agriculture (i.e. is beneficial to or stimulates the process 
of ploughing), men who live by agriculture, and Parjanya, while the last pada 
is pronounced with a desire for wealth, “or (it may be said)”, BD, adds, 
“that the whole sukta praises (i.e. furthers) agriculture”. — For these rites 
in general see Hillebrandt, Rit. p. 85. Compare also A. Weber, Omina und 
Portents (Berlin Academy 1858, p. 373). 

7. For ritual ploughing see Meyer, Trilogie, o.c., I, p. 113 ff. The phrase 
viharati laiigalam is unknown to me from elsewhere. — Indra is mentioned 
RV. 4, 57, 7, Parjanya 8, Pusan 7, the furrow 7, (Qwwslratt 8); according 
to BD. 5, S £una is Vayu, the Wind. £wiaslra(h) j Sj however, identified 
with Indra, Bhaga is regularly considered as a distributor of wealth and 
prosperity. — The syntactic construction (14, 1) is not clear. 



3. 


y ' 

yy 


' s ^ 

tf Q y r y 

grains, spirituous liquor and rum. At the^so^n g^ ^ the-rndving, at 
(the time of) the gifts to the threshing-floor and the furrow 
one shall regularly worship the same gods, according to the rule 
and (being in a) pure (state). The rite is infallible, the harvest 


always thrives. — 

4. A twice-born man shall mutter the three stanzas dedicated to the 
Lord of the field, viz. “with the Lord of the field”, (and) regularly 
look at the sun : (then) he comes into possession of an excellent field. 

5. One shall (also), on mole-hills, worship the rats (and mice) with 
sacrificial food consisting of boiled rice (whilst muttering) this 
(sukta). And having always praised the Lord of the moles with this 
(stanza) “Citra is a king” 

1. one shall then feed brahmans and also [feed] the poor tillers. 
Attentive and filled with peace of mind one shall spontaneously 
proceed to cultivation of the soil. 

2. Breaking the soil, harming cows, destroying grass, worms etc. : the 
evil which is done in these cases becomes purified by the gift to 
the threshing-floor. 

3. One shall hand over the twentieth part of grain to the brahmans 
versed in the sacred lore : for by the gift of the twentieth part one 
is released from the guilt of ploughing. — 

4. (The man) who always pours out gliee, with the sukta “from the 


4. “With the Lord of the field” : RV. 4, 57, 1-3 (see above). Stanza 1 reads 
like this : “With the Lord of the field ... we acquire (a field) which nourishes 
cow(s) and horse(s)”. 

5. The farmer must, of course, keep friends with vtiisikah (rats and mice). 

The stanza meant is RV. 8, 21, 18 which is not in the right order here. 

This last verse of RV. 8, 21, which is addressed to Indra, is, together with 

st. 17 a danastuti “a 'prist 1 of liberality”, extolling king Citra who gave 

away a thousand of myriads. — Moles, which are the animals of Rudra, are 
like other animals which might else be harmful, occasionally worshipped or 
rather propitiated. In case of need an offering may be made to the king of 
the moles (GobhGS. 4, 4, 31). As moles “know the essence of the earth” 
and as they cast it up wherever they know that essence to be, mole-hills 
represent this essence and so bring about sri- (splendour, fortune) : QatBr. 
2, 1, 1, 7. 

1. The serf who tilled the field was “das Urbild des armseligen Tropfs” 
(J. J. Meyer, Das altind. Buch vom Welt- und Staatsleben, 1926, p. 775); 
the word kinasa- also denotes a very poor man. 

3. Learned brahmans ( srotriyah ) are free from taxation, must be entertained 
at auspicious rites, have a right to be supported by the king etc. Being 
sacrosanct, they themselves and even their descendants sanctify a company 
(see, e.g., Manu, passim). — Presenting gifts to brahmans etc. is held to 
‘destroy sins': Gonda, Drama, p. 395 ff.; Gampert, p. 72 etc. 


48 


sea” is from all sides protected by the (god of) fire, — together 
with prosperous movable property. 

5. Controlling one’s self, having subdued one’s organs of sense, one 
shall according to the ritual precept which has been said before with 
(the stanza) “far with light” kindle a fire where one desires (it) 
from Jatavedas. 

6. Whoever worships the fire (muttering) the two stanzas (beginning 
with) “al us” escapes all misfortunes and acquires imperishable 
glory. 

7. After an oblation, the fire, the bearer of the oblations, has, with 
the sukta “Agni, you”, to be worshipped for the sake of life by 
(a person) who desires wealth and (a full) life. 

16. 1. Whoever wishes manifold property and great incomparable strength 

of character must with the sukta “of your large” worship Sata- 
kratu 

2. (A man) who is desirous of offspring shall regularly worship the 
wives of the gods with an oblation of rice (etc.) boiled with milk 
and butter. And, having presented the offspring he must, (being) 
reserved in speech, eat the remainders, 

3. and, when he desires a son, he has to give the leavings to his wife. 
He must prepare a sacrificial mess with milk of a cow which has 
a calf of the same colour (or : outward appearance) : 

4. RV, 4 } 58 is meant; according to the Anukramanika it is either addressed 
to Agni, the Sun (Surya), Apah (Water), Gavah (cows), or a ghrtostuti- 
“praise of ghee”. The ghrta, which is identified with the soma, is repeatedly 
mentioned; the whole of the world is founded on its power etc. St. 8 makes 
mention of Agni. See also BD. 5, 10 f. 

5. Said before:? — The stanza referred to is RV. 5, 2, 9. — BD. 5, 14 ff. 
relates an interesting story: after Vrsa, the domestic priest of king Tryaruna, 
had left the king in anger, the heat of Tryaruna's fire also disappeared; 
being propitiated the priest returned and when he uttered this stanza: “Far 
with powerful light Agni shines . . the fire suddenly flamed up. RV. 5, 2 
is addressed to Agni. — Jatavedas = Agni. 

6. RV. 5, 4, 9 and 10, addressed to Agni : “Rescue us, 0 Jatavedas, from 
all dangers, . . . grant us renown (glory, yasas), . . . may I reach continued life 
(amrtatvam) in my offspring”. 

7. RV. 5, 24, addressed to the same god, who is requested to be a protector, to 
afford shelter, to give wealth, and to defend from the malicious. 

Id 1. RV. 5, 38, addressed to Indra. St. 1 makes mention of the god’s abundant 
gifts and his rejoicing in power and wealth, in st. 4 he is requested to give 
manhood or courage. 

2. Meyer (p. 48, n. 40 and p. 16) is right in surmising that before this stanza 
a reference to RV. 46, 7 and 8 (or 7 only) has been omitted. These verses 
are addressed to the Devapatnls, the wives of the gods, who are requested 



49 


4. (then) he will immediately get resembling (worth)?') offspring ; there 
is no doubt. — A brahman shall every morning, (being in a) pure 
(state) mutter the (sukta communicated by) Svastyatreya, 

5. this (is) an auspicious blessing which destroys all stains. — One 
shall see off a friend or a kinsman who sets out by reciting 

1. the sacred text “for welfare the path” : happy he goes on his way. — 
The stanza “open, O tree” is handed down as (a text) which causes 
to fall. 

2. Of whom one desires to bring about the fall (or : expulsion), him 
one will cause to fall (be expelled) by muttering this (stanza) ; (be 
it) one's rival — if one treads with the foot upon his image made 
in sand on the soil, 

3. he goes no doubt away, forcibly expelled from his dwelling. And 
(be it) a woman who is bewildered by the fetus (by labour-pains), 
one shall also cause her to drink water which has been consecrated 

4. with (this) same expulsor’ : (then) the fetus will easily fall down- 
ward. — But (a man) who is desirous of rain must make use of 
the sukta “invoke” 

to help man in order to obtain offspring and to obtain booty or food (Nirukta 
12, 45 apatyajananaya cannasamsananaya ca). For these goddesses see Keith, 
RPh., p. 218 f . — “Of the same colour etc ” : see also 3, 18, 5. 

4. Svastyatreya is the seer of RV. 5, 50 and 51, which are dedicated to the 
Visve devah. The word svasti “well-being, prosperity, success; happily, 
successfully” occurs once in 5, 50, and seventeen times in 5, 51 ; hence RVidh. 
calls the suktas an auspicious blessing’ : svastyayanam. — See especially 
RV. 5, 50, 13 “prosperously Rudra shall protect us from distress”. 

5. “For welfare ( svasti ) the path” : RV. 5, 51, 15 : “May we happily go along 
the path . . 

1. The stanza quoted is RV. 5, 78, 5 which, being addressed to the Asvins 
reads like this: ‘Open, O tree, like the womb of (a woman) who gives birth 
(to a child) ; listen, o Asvins, to my invocation : set Saptavadhri free”. As 
BD. 5, 82 calls RV. 5, 78, 5-9 “an upanisatstuti - consisting of five stanzas 
with a view to childbirth”, the SarvanukramanI considers them as a garbha- 
sraviny upanisat “an esoteric text which has the unborn child issuing from 
the womb”, and as, moreover, Sadgurusisya says that these five stanzas are 
specified as an aggregate, the chances are that st. 5-9 are meant by the 
RVidh. According to a sacred tradition, Saptavadhri, the seer of RV. 5, 78, 
was cast into a trough made of a tree because he was not able to beget a 
child for his king. After praising the Asvins the rsi, being raised by them 
out of the tree (or chasm), became productive again (BD. 5, 82 ff). Sayana, 
in his introduction to RV. 5, 78, 5, tells another version of the story : the 
fsi was placed in a box at night by his rivals and kept from intercourse 
with his wife; the Asvins, however, rescued him. — See Meyer, p. II. 

3. Instead of Meyer’s conjecture I propose: iiispK^d^yaKmuna^m^-o) 
nivasac. 

4. “Invoke”: RV. 5, 83, addressed to Parjanya, whose most prominent charac- 

4 



so 


5. without eating and wearing wet clothes : in a short time it will begin 
to rain. Having poured out into the fire ten thousand pieces of fuel 
of rattan anointed with milk 

6. one obtains abundant rain by means of (this) sukta (which begins) 
with “invoke”. — Whoever desires that the wish-fulfilling goddess 
Sri should always reside in his family 

18. 1. must daily, being pure and well-prepared, offer clarified butter, and, 

(being) desirous of bliss (in-), continually mutter the fifteen stanzas 
(dedicated) to Sri. 

2. He shall invite Sri into a lotus with five, or also into gold, he shall 
offer as oblations white victuals, milk, sour milk, 

3. and he shall prepare with milk a mess of cooked offerings (sthdlb 
paka of rice. Having disciplined himself by means of a candrayana 
he must, (being) well-prepared, resort to Sri, 

4. with infused herbs of all sorts, after having performed ceremonious 
bathing with water, (or) also with (other) means of purification. 

teristic is the shedding of rain; cf., e.g., st. 10 “Thou hast shed rain..”. 
In st. 6 the Maruts, who, representing wind and storm, are also concerned in 
the process of raining, are requested to give the water of heaven. I also 
refer to Henry, M., Index, p. 282. 

5. Rattan: see II, 9, 2. — Vaitastmm in the text, sc. samidhant , cf. e.g. AthV.- 
Par. 36, 22, 1. 

17. 6-21. 2 are related to the Grlsukta. This well-known little text is a khila (additional 
sukta) appended to the 5th mandala (book) of the RV. and, like the other 
khilais, handed down in recensions other than the vulgate Cakala which has 
1017 suktas. See J. Scheftelowitz, Die Apokryphen des Rgveda, Breslau 1906, 

p. 72 f. and Crisukta, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenl. Ges. 75, p. 37 ff.; 

and, moreover, N. S. Sontakke and C. G. Kashikar’s edition of the Rgveda- 
Samhita, Poona, vol. IV, 1946, p. 891 ff. ; 897; 927. This sukta which is 
handed down in a large number of manuscripts and has often been commented 
upon, has been often read and recited since old times and repeatedly quoted 
in books dealing with religious rites. It describes Qri as the patron saint of 
the farmers, who gives prosper^, and is connected with the fertilizing waters 
(lotus, II, 18, 2) and vegetation. According to BD. 5, 91 the £r!s. is a 
‘benediction’ (a s'wvada-). 

17. 6. “Family” : Qtis. st. 12 ni ca devlm . . . vasaya me kulc. 

18. 1. “Fifteen”: the number of the stanzas is not always the same (23, 29 etc.), 

but fifteen are handed down with a commentary. See Macdonell, BD. II, 
p. 189. — In M. Muller’s edition of the RVJ. f London 1849-1874, this stanza 
RVidh. II, 18, 1 forms part of the Qrisukta (after st. 15); likewise in the 
Khila-collection (Sch., p. 77). 

2. “Lotus” : cf. Qris. 4 “I invite Qri . . the lotus-hued, who rests on a lotus”. 
— “Gold”: cf. Crls. 1 “O Agni, inrite, on my behalf, (the goddess) LaksmI 
(= Gri), the gold-coloured one...” — “Five”; stanzas 1-5. Cf., e.g., also 
Var. BS. 48, 18 ff. 

3. Candrayana: see above, I, 6, 2. 



51 


“The companion of the gods shall come near to me” is a stanza 
which consecrates a king. 

5. This (stanza) “the wish of the mind” consecrates him who is 
desirous of possessing cattle. Whoever bathes (whilst muttering) 
“with Kardama” : desirous of offspring and intent on purity. 

1. (Muttering) “accompanied by horses” shall bathe (the man) who is 
desirous of a kingdom and intent on purity. A brahman must bathe 
on a red skin according to the ritual rule. 

2. A king on the skin of a tiger, a ksatriya on (the skin) of a ruru- 
deer, a vaisya, however, on the skin of a goat. An oblation has to 
be performed soon after. 

3. With “the shining” a twice-born man shall pour out lotus flowers 
with clarified butter. With the (stanza) “having the colour of the 
sun” an oblation of bilva is performed. 

4. The fuel of the fire must consist of bilva, and the twice-born man 
must pour out cooked offerings. The oblation (must be performed) 
ten thousand times (if one is) desirous of fortune (glory, sri -) : (this 
is) the first (former) rule. 

5. But by offering, in the correct way, a hundred thousand one obtains 
endless fortune (in-). Having, however, offered a hundred times 
ten thousand white (victuals) with ghee, 

1. one obtains endless, uninterrupted, eternal fortune. Should (a man) 
be unable to do these things the muttering only said ten thousand 
times is the best. 

2. Having correctly muttered a hundred thousand one obtains endless 

4. Infused : the word phdnta- is often explained as the first particles of butter 
which appear in churning; it is, however, also used as an adjective meaning 
“infused”, the substantive meaning “infusum, decoction made by an easy 
process” “durch bloBen OberguB und Durchseihung gewonnen” (K. F. 
Johansson, Zeitschr. f. Indologie u. Iran. 3, p. 212 ff.). — “The companion 
of the god shall come near to me” : (Jris. 7. 

5. “The wish of the heart” : (Jrls. 10 (“Unseres Herzens Wunsch und Vorsatz 
und die Verwirklichung des Wortes”, Scheftelowitz). — “Through Kar- 
dama”: Gris. 11 (‘Through Kardama”: (Iris. 11 (“Through Kardama the 
beings have come into existence, be with me, O Kardama”). K. (“Dung”) is 
Qri’s son. 

1. “Accompanied . . .” : Gris. st. 3. Compare ManGS. 2, 13, st. 9. The stanza 
reads like this : “ . . . standing in the middle of the chariot, delighted by the 
trumpeting of the elephants . . ., let Qri be pleased with me.” — As to the 
reading asvapiirvam which is also handed down in the abstract contained in 
the Agni Pur. 258, 55, see also Meyer, p. 48. 

3. “The shining” : (Iris. st. 5. — “Having . . . sun” : Gris. st. 6. This stanza 
states that the bilva (wood-apple tree, Aegle marmelos) is C«’s tree (it is 
also called (Jrivrksa), and its fruit is asked to remove bad luck. 



52 


fortune. But by muttering a hundred times ten thousand one comes 
(definitively) into the possession of fortune. 

3. One must, in the night, regularly offer lotus-flowers by myriads in 
the water. When, however, one has seen Sri, one shall cease : (other- 
wise) one will have reason to fear leprosy. 

4. Eating bilva-fruits, living amidst bilvas, offering bilvas together 
with ghee one brings near the highest success in (after) twenty-one 
days. 

5. With whatsoever desire (a man, being) well-prepared, offers lotus- 
flowers or also bilva-fruits to Sri, that very desire is fulfilled. 

21. 1. One shall by no means invite Sri for the sake of a miser. Let an 

oblation in no way be performed with a desire for anything 
whatever 

2. or by one who strives after might (dominion) or again by one who 
is desirous of kingship. If one strives after the highest degree of 
speech one must diligently (and) attentively worship Sri. — 

3. With the sukta “let Agni come” one must pour out ghee ever} 7 day: 
(then) one obtains mighty offspring which is devoted to dharma and 
fortunate (or : handsome, etc.). 

4. With the stanza “towards us” one must worship the blazing fire: 
having obtained intelligence one will conquer one’s enemies and 
overcome difficulties. 

5. With the sukta “hither the cows” one must revere the mothers of 
the world, (both those) which are in the stable and the wandering 
ones, when one wishes them to be always (one’s) imperishable 
(possession). 

20. 3. Lotus: see above, II, 17, 6. 

21. 3. “Let Agni come”: khila 2, 11 belonging to the series of khilas at the end 

of the 5th mandala of the RV. The sukta, which, with a number of variants 
is found in the marriage section of several Grhyasutras, is a prayer addressed 
to Agni asking the god to deliver the children of “this woman” from the 
noose of Death, to avert disaster from them, to give them a long lifetime 
and so on. See Scheftelowitz, o.c., p. S3 ; Sontakke and Kashikar’s Rgveda IV, 
p. 936. The text is, after the name of its rsi, known as the Jivaputra “whose 
son(s) (children) are living”. 

4. The verse meant is RV. 6, 2, 11, addressed to Agni and asking him to invite 
the gods and to assist man in surmounting distress and disaster. The words 
chin! a tarcma recur (as taratc dnritam ) in RVidh. Instead of “intelligence” 
(prajndm) two mss. read “offspring” (fira/im), 

5. “Hither the cows” : RV. 6, 2S, addressed to the cows and partly to (the cows 
and) Indra; see also BD. 5, 106. The sukta is a blessing of the cows which, 
as is well known, possess a certain sanctity, already in tire RV. — “Being 
in the stable” : cf. RV. 6, 28, 1 ; “imperishable” : cf. st. 3. — The cow is 



53 


6. With the pragatha 4 you, indeed” one must worship Satakratu. If 
one mutters (it) at noon and at the two twilight-times one will 
obtain wealth. 

1. With the three (stanzas) “unto” one must sprinkle the drums of 
the king in the battle : then one obtains a dignified and influential 
personality (and) strength, and subdues the enemies. — 

2. Who having taken grass in his hand concentrates his attention upon 
(the sukta beginning with) “with every sacrifice”, obtains the fruit 
of the study of that sukta : he will (always) be in possession of grass. 

3. And at the end of the sukta he must throw grass into the fire, 
into the water-course or into thfe water, having, by applying himself 
to that, left behind elsewhere what is fearful. 

4. If he, whilst holding grass in the hand, mutters (this) raksas-killing 
sukta, he nowhere meets with danger of raksas and enemies, (even 
if) he be surrounded by dasyus. — 

5. (The man who,) leaving his home, starts a journey out of desire 
for money shall, going on his way, diligently mutter (the stanza 
beginning with) “the path”. 

6. Having muttered the stanza “whosoever from earth”, meditating, 

called “mother” or “mother of the world”, cf. e.g. Mbh. 12, 145, 8. — 
Compare also SVidh. 3, 7, 10; AsvGS. 2, 10, 5. — On cows in Vedic India; 
M. A. Muusses, Koecultus bij de Hindoes, Thesis Utrecht 1920, ch. I. 

6. “You, indeed” ; RV. 6, 46, addressed to Indra (~ Qatakratu). — “Wealth* : 
cf. st. 2; 7. — Pragatha - is the technical name of a kind of stanza. 

1. One; the priest. — The stanzas quoted are RV. 6, 47, 29-31, addressed to 
the drum (see also BD. 5, 112), except for 31 cd, which belong to Indra. 
This text, which also occurs in the AV. (6, 126) and several other corpora 
(see Whitney-Lanman, AV., p. 375), is used by KausS. 16, 1 in a battle rite. 
St. 29 instructs the drum to “drive away our enemies further than far” ; 
st. 30 to “assign strength and might ( balam ojah, the same woods are in 
RVidh.) to us” ; st. 31 to “conquer those yonder”. “A d. etc. personality” : ojas. 

2. “With every sacrifice” : RV. 6, 48, the stanzas of which are, successively, 
addressed to Agni (1-10), the Maruts (11; 12; 20; 21), Pusan (16-19), 
Prsni (22; P., the cloud-cow, is the mother of the Maruts); cf. also BD. 5, 
113 f. The sukta is called the Trnapanikam; the compound trnapani - means 
“having grass in one’s hand”. — For the magical use of grass: Meyer, 
Trilogie, II, p. 165 f. and SBE. 50, p. 425. As to the effect of the rite, cf. 
especially st. 8; 10; 21. Cf. also II, 13, 1. — See Meyer, p. II. 

4. Dasyus : a collective name for enemies of the gods, gods of the defeated 
aborigines and their adorers, later barbarians, outcasts, robbers, impious 
men etc. 

5. The stanza quoted is RV. 6, 51, 16 which is addressed to the All-gods {Visve 
devah ) : ”We have set foot on the way which leads to well-being, the 
unmenaced, past which one passes over all hostility and gains property 7 . In 
a comparable way Cankh.GS. ^ ^ $ 


54 


at night, upon the denizens of the sky (the gods) one will gain a 
long life-time, if one has also poured out ghee with this (stanza). 

23. 1. One shall, being pure, regularly mutter the sukta (beginning with) 

“we you” which is addressed to Pusan and increases wealth : (then) 
one finds the wealth one desires. 

2. Of whom any property, a cow, a man, money, is lost, or who, in 
error, gets lost on his way, (that man) shall mutter (the sukta 
beginning with) “with Pusan” in the night. 

3. A twice-born man shall, being pure, regularly mutter the sukta 
“she” addressed to Sarasvatl at the beginning and end of the rite : 
(then) he becomes eloquent (and) wise. 

4. The sukta “together” which is handed down as consisting of eight 
stanzas and as being composed in tristubh-metre, muttering that, 
(being) well-prepared (and) regularly, one obtains the objects of 
one’s desires. 

5. The sukta which (begins with) “who splits mountains” is a destroyer 
of rivals; after paying homage to Brhaspati one lays low many 
rivals. * — 

24. 1. When one is either sinful or infamous, or when one has performed 

a contemptible deed, one must mutter the sukta (addressed) to Soma 
and Rudra : (then) one dispels all sin. 

6. “Whosoever” : RV. 6, 52, 15, requesting the gods of heaven, earth and water 
to refresh the whole of man’s lifetime and to give him relief by night and 
by day. — See above, I, 18, 3. 

23. 1. “We you”: RV. 6, 53, which is addressed to Pusan and asks the god to 

give goods and liberal men and to incite the parsimonious to give. AsvGS. 
3, 7, 8 prescribes the sukta for him who goes on a business-tour. 

2. RV. 6, 54 is meant; it is addressed to Pusan, the god who guides man to 
the spot where the lost cattle is (st 2), who protects the horses (5), whose 
property is never lost (8) and to whom man prays that he himself may never 
suffer injury (9) and the cattle that have been lost may be driven up for 
him (10). — Similarly AsvGS. 3, 7,9. 

3. RV. 6, 61, addressed to Sarasvatl. The sukta makes no mention of her 
granting eloquence and wisdom; see also above, note on I, 5, 4. 

4, “Together”: RV. 6, 69, addressed to Indra and Visnu and asking them to 
give goods, to answer prayers, etc. 

5, RV. 6, 73, in praise of Brhaspati (see my Notes on brahman, Utrecht 1950, 
p. 66 ff.), who (st. 2) is said to destroy malignant powers, to gain the victory 
over enemies, to kill adversaries. 

24. 1. RV. 6, 74 is referred to, which is addressed to Soma and Rudra, who are 

asked to drive away sickness (amiva) (st. 2), to deliver man from sin (cnas) 
(st. 3), and to protect him (st, 4). Part of the sukta is also found in the AV. 
(7, 42), and KausS. 32, 3 uses it in a remedial rite. — Manu, 11, 254, makes 
a man who has committed many sins recite this sukta, while bathing in a 
river; after a month he will be pure. 



55 


2. Who, on the other side, devoted to his vow, continually sacrifices 
with these verses of the Rgveda, becomes free from the fetters of 
Varuna, and will also obtain happiness. • — 

3. Having considered the ritual rule of (in connection with) the sukta 
of the thunder-cloud according to the characteristic indications 
(words) one must with (these) stanzas of the Rgveda, according to 
the ritual rule, perform rites for the parts of the chariot. 

4. And one must use this (sukta) for a king who has gone to war. One 
must consecrate all the parts (of the chariot), and the chariot-horses, 
and the noble horses (with this text). • — 

5. Who has been consecrated (with this text) will not return without 
having gained the victory, towards whatever country or enemy he 
might go : for it is (represents) the highest power of Brahman. 

1. Whoever wishes sons, (a long) life and health, (and) everlasting 
pleasure, must with the sukta “Agni the men” daily offer clarified 
butter. 

2. With the three suktas “Forth to Agni” (and so on) (a man) must 
undertake a muttering at the moments of twilight: (then) he does 
not feel fear from demons and obtains undecaying wealth. — 

3. Eight, eight, and so also eight — (this) is (considered) a stanza, 
which consists of three quarters (padas), and begins with the syllable 
a and ends in the syllable ha, muttering (it) quickly (while) standing 
in water : 

2. II V. 6, 74, 4 the same gods are also asked to deliver from Varuna’s fetter. 
— The word “happiness, happily” {sain) occurs twice in st. 1. 

3. RV. 6, 75 is called the sukta of the thunder-cloud, because its first stanza, 
which praises the warrior in his coat of mail, begins in this way: “Like a 
thunder-cloud he looks . . .” According to BD. 5, 124-142 Bharadvaja, who 
became the domestic priest of the kings Abhyavartin and Prastoka, ordered 
his son to make these kings unconquerable. For that purpose the son con- 
secrated their implements of war one by one with the stanzas of this sukta. 
Thus st. 7 ‘praises’ the horses (“treading down the enemies with the points 
of their feet”). And praised by Bharadvaja Indra slew the enemies in com- 
pany with Abhyavartin. A similar rite is described SVidh. 3, 6, 1 ff. (Cf. 
also AVPar. 4, 1 etc.). 

5. This stanza is identical with IV, 2, 1 cd; 2 ab. 

1. “Agni the men” : RV. 7, 1, addressed to Agni, who is, among other things, 
requested to give offspring (st. 5; 11; 12; 19; 24) and a full life (st. 24), 
to protect from distress (15), etc. 

2. “Forth to Agni” ; IJ.V. 7, 5 and the two next suktas are quoted. They are 
addressed to Agni, 5 and 6 to (Agni) Vaisvanara. The god is said or asked 
to have the disposal of gifts and goods (5, st. 5 ; 8 ; 9) ; he subdues various 
malicious enemies. 

3-5. Are handed down in only one manuscript; see Meyer, p. 48. The 1st quarter 



56 


4. at the same moment (myriads of) ten millions of minor offences 
and myriads of (sins of) killing a brahman and the sin committed 
by the killing of an embryo disappear : 

5. “I have appointed Agni to (the function of) messenger” ; a O Agni, 
protect us from distress”; “with infallible radiance”; “hither the 
divine women, O Agni, for aid”. — 

6. Who with the pragatha (which begins with) “towards you” regularly 
praises the (god) who wields the thunderbolt (Indra) enjoys abund- 
ant welfare (fortune) and obtains wealth and (a full) life. 

7. (The stanza) which has formerly been recited by Vasistha is a great 
means of wiping away portents, and in the case of Visvamitra’s 
incantations it was a great means of warding off raksas. 

8. Whoever wishing (to marry) a woman continually mutters the sukta 
“in the early morning”, obtains a worthy maiden who has her own 
natural appearance, (and) a long life. 

9. Having bathed a teacher must at the rite of house-building sacrifice 

(mutter?) the first (sukta?) of the following , after performing 

cf. st 5 = RV. 8, 44, 3a; the 2d <= RV. 7, 15, 13a; the 3d = RV. 10, 
118, 7a. They all consist of 8 syllables and form part of a stanza consisting 
of 3 padas. The three siiktas are directed to Agni (10, 118 to Agni the killer 
of raksas). The three verses begin with a and end in h(a). The pada “Hither 
the divine women, O Agni, for aid” is RV. 1, 22, 10a, and addressed to Agni 

(Amikn) or the goddesses (BD. 3, 92). This stanza likewise consists of 3 

padas, and ends in ha. 

4. “Minor offences”, such as forgetting the Veda, killing kine, offending a 
guru, breaking a vow of chastity; see the long list drawn up by Gampert, 
o.c., p. 38-43, — “Murder of a Brahman” (brahinahatya) also includes any 
crime equally heinous. — “Killing an embryo”: see above, II, 11, 5. 

6. “Towards you”; the text refers to RV. 7, 32, 22 and 23 which, being 
addressed to Indra, extol the god and state that his adorers are desirous of 
horses and cows. 

7-9. are found in one manuscript. Like 3-5 they seem to be interpolated. 

7. Vasistha: like almost the whole of the 7th mandala, sukta 32 is attributed 

to Vasistha himself. — As is well known, the RV. frequently alludes to 
the enduring conflict between the brahman rsi Vasistha and the sage Visva- 
mitra who raised himself from the ksatriya to the brahman rank. The two 
sages even cursed each other, and had recourse to deeds of violence. See 
also above II, 3, 1-2. — Meyer (p. 19) suggested that the text refers to RV. 
7, 32, 26-27, which implore Indra to grant strength of mind and to help 
against the wicked. “Portents”: adbhuta - is a conjecture (Meyer); the mss. 
have ahnuta- “not concealed'’. 

8. “In the early morning”: RV. 7, 41, of which the stanzas 2-6 are addressed 
to Bhaga, who is requested to bless man and to give him kine and horses. 
Though he generally is a distributor of wealth in the Rgveda, other texts 
make him preside over marriage. See also II, 25, 11. 

9. “House-building”: see Hillebrandt, Rituall., p. 80 f. and M. J. Dresden, 



57 


the rite consecrated to the All-gods; this is called the highest 
brahman. — 

10. “Auspicious” (and) “auspicious for us, Indra and Agni”, these two 
(suktas) must be continually muttered by him : (then) there will be 
no fear from demons, nor from spirits {bhiitah), nor from diseases. 

11. Whoever wishes to take a wife (but) is afflicted by illness, must 
always concentrate his attention upon the sukta dedicated to Bhaga : 
then he immediately founds a household and is freed from diseases. 

16. 1. A twice-born man must, (being) clean, regularly mutter the sukta 

dedicated to Rudra, (which begins with) “these”. By muttering that 
he suffers no wrong in his offspring, his property and in himself. 

2. Whoever at the confluence of streams hesitates (is anxious) when 
he has to pass the water must mutter the sukta “whose chief is 
the sea” which wards off fear (danger). 

3. One must, in the morning and being pure, mutter the two suktas 
of which the Adityas are the godhead, which kill the enemies and 
destroy illness : (then) one gets rid of enemies and diseases. 

Manava^hyasutxa, Thesis Utrecht 1941, p. 144 ft. — This stanza, the second 
half of which seems to have been taken over from II, 26, 4, has probably been 
patched up bv a ‘copyist’. 

10. “Auspicious” (read : samvatih, cf. also Meyer, p. XXIII) : khila 2, 13, to be 
found after RV. 7, 34 (Scheftelowitz, p. 85; RV. ed. Sontakke and Kashikar, 
IV, p. 937). The text, among other topics, deals with appeasement of evil, 
well-being, etc. — “Auspicious for us, Indra and Agni”: RV. 7, 35, which 
has (I, 3, 5) been designated as samvatyah (viz. re ah) and in other texts is 
called the samtatlyam suktam etc. (see note on I, 23, 5). Being directed to 
the Visve devah it enumerates a large number of divinities, asking them to 
be favourable: “Weal for us be Indra-and-Agni with their aids” etc. It is 
also found in AV. 19, 10 and 11, “for vrell-being”, and used in the mahdsanti- 
(an expiatory observance and recitation for averting evil) AVPar. 32, 1. — 
“Spirits”: the term bhuta- often also includes imps, ghosts, goblins, etc. 

11. The sukta RV. 7, 41 is meant. See note on II, 25, 8. For other ritual use 
I refer to Whitney-Lanman, AV., p. 113 (AV. 3, 16 = RV. 7, 41). The 
sukta, though asking for well-being, makes no mention of founding a 
household and freedom from illness. 

26 1. “These” : RV. 7, 46. St. 2d and 3d ask the god for health and preservation 

of the offspring. 

2. “V hose chief is the sea” : RV. 7, 49, which is in praise of the Waters. 
These divine powers are requested to help the person speaking (st. Id etc.). 
According to CankhGS. 4, 14, 5 the text must be muttered by one who, while 
crossing water, apprehends any danger. Then the text will serve him as a boat. 

3. The Adityas, to whom the suktas 7, 51 and 52 are addressed, are a group 
of gods to which Mitra, Aryaman, Varuna, Bhaga and other divinities 
belong ; but it is on the whole rather indefinite both as to the number of the 
gods it includes and as to their names. They are the sons of Aditi. They are 
said to protect their worshippers (RV. 8, 47, 2; 7), to v/ard off illness and 



58 


4. One must mutter the sukta (beginning with) “0 Vastospati” which 
is dedicated to the genius of the dwelling after bathing and per- 
forming the rite consecrated to the All-gods; this is called the 
highest brahman. 

5. With the sukta “destroying pains” one must at night bring the evil 
beings to sleep. For there does not exist anywhere a soporiferous 
(text) like this, — 

27. 1. In case of distress, at an impassable bad road, or when one, after 

having been confined, goes away somewhere, or in running away, 
or when one has been caught by robbers, one must mutter this 
(sukta, viz.) 

2. “destroying pains” ; with the exception of the stanza containing (the 
word) visva one must apply the [other] (stanzas of this sukta). 
Saunaka (however) holds the opinion that one must mutter this 
sukta in its entirety. — 

3. (A man who) is restrained and abstains from food must for three 
days cook sacrificial food consisting of (rice) boiled in milk; with it 
a twice-born man must sacrifice a full hundred of offerings with 
clarified butter, 

4 . dedicating (it) to Mahadeva Tryambaka with the stanza beginning 
with (the name) Tryambaka. When one has performed this (rite) 
on a hundred days of the changes of the moon (parvans), one will 
live happily during a hundred years. — 

distress (8, 18, 10), to set traps for their enemies (2, 27, 16) etc. In RV. 51 
and 52 they are asked for help, safety, well-being, etc. 

4. According to the Anuk. and BD. 6, 2 RV. 7, 54 (which, being quoted here, 
consists pf 3 stanzas) and 55, 1 are addressed to Vastospati “the genius of 
the dwelling”, who is asked to grant a favourable entry, to remove disease, 
to confer prosperity, and always to give protection. 

5. According to the Anuk. and the reading of BD. 6, 2 adopted by Macdonell 
the stanzas RV. 7, 55, 2-8 only are traditionally held to be lullabies. Two 
groups of verses must be distinguished: in 2-4 Yama's dog Sarameya is 
addressed and conjured to go to sleep (BD. 6, 11 ff. relates the story of 
Vasistha approaching the house of Varuna at night and lulling to sleep the 
dog which was making a din and ran up to bite him with st. 2 and 3); 
st. 5-8, which are included in AV. 4, 5, form an incantation to put to sleep. 
See also R. Pischel, in Pischel-Geldner, Vedische Studien, II, 1897, p. 55 ff. 
— Evil beings: bhiitani; for bhutas see note on II, 25, 10. 

26. 5 arid 27. 2. “Destroying pains, O Vastospati, assuming all shapes, be a kind friend 
to us” : RV. 7, 55, 1. This stanza contains the word visva “all”. — Caunaka, 
see Meyer, p. XVII r Here the opinion of another authority is confronted 
with the expert judgement of the reputed author. 

4, Mahadeva = Qiva. Tryambaka is a common name of £iva j n later literature. 
As the SarvanukramanI considers the stanza quoted here, viz. RV. 7, 59, 12, 



59 


5. Having bathed one must with the stanza (beginning with) “that 
eye” revere the sun when it rises and when it is in the middle (of 
its course), if one wishes to live a long life. * — 

1. Whoever, rising in the latter part of the night, (being) well-prepared 
and pure, makes an anjali and worships with the six suktas (begin- 
ning with) “forth Dawn”, 

2. will obtain gold etc., much and manifold wealth: cows, horses, men, 
corn, women, garments, goats and sheep. — 

3. By muttering (the stanza) “in these fixed abodes thee” one is freed 
when bound (confined) ; one must mutter it during the night whilst 
standing: (then) one becomes freed from fetters. 

4. During a day and a night one should be standing without eating 
(and) without moving any limb( ?) : (then) one’s iron fetters burst, 
and likewise the wooden shackles. 

5. With (the stanza) “agreeable” one must, being always restrained, 
come to the goddess Earth and mutter this verse ; then one is freed 
also from the fetter in the ground (stocks?). — 

1. Whatever crime one performs with deed, mind (or) voice, one gets 
rid of that (sc. of the evil consequences) by muttering the stanza 
“whatever here, O Varuna”. 

to be addressed to Rudra — BD. 6, 3 only remarks : “the last stanza of (the 
group 7, 56-59) praises Tryambaka, the divine father” — , and as other Vedic 
texts (see Macdonell, VM. p. 74) apply the name T. to this god, the chances 
are that Rudra is actually meant in the sukta. In this stanza T., “who 
increases prosperity 5 is revered and this wish expressed : “May I be delivered 
from death, not from not-death (i.e. a long life, amrta-). f 

5. “That eye”: RV. 7, 66, 16. The stanza is directed to Surya; cf. also BD. 6, 5: 
“May we see that eye (of the sun) rising, may we live for a hundred years !” 

1. The suktas referred to are RV. 7, 75-80, which, like 81, are addressed to 
the goddess Dawn, Usas. Cf. 7, 75, 8 “Give us, O Dawn, wealth consisting 
of cow 3 , of sons (heroes), of horses, (wealth) comprising many articles 
of food”. 

3. “In these fixed abodes (revering) thee” : RV. 7, 88, 7 : „While we . . . abide 
in these f. a., may Varuna loosen the fetter from us”. According to BD. 
6, 14 f. Vasistha, being bound by his father, Varuna, praised the god with 
RV. 7, 86-89; as soon as this stanza had been pronounced, the fetters dropped 
from him. 

4. Thus?, cf. Ram. 2, 63, 52 vicestasya ; Meyer surmised vivestitah (cf. Hariv. 
10200) “wound round”, i.e. “if one is fettered”. 

5. This stanza which refers to RV. 1, 22, 15 must have been interpolated, the 
preceding verses likewise mentioning fetters. See above, I, 17, 3. RV. 1, 22, 5 
asks the earth to be gentle and to protect the persons speaking. 

1. For the phrase “thoughts, words, deeds” see also Manu, 1, 104; 2, 236; 
Yajn. 1, 27 and many other texts (cf. also Meyer, p. 20 f. note). — 
“Whatever here, O Varuna”: RV. 7, 89, 5. The stanza runs like this: 
“Whatever wrong we men here commit against the race of the gods, O V., 



2. And this is (also) enjoined as an expiation in case of illicit sexual 
intercourse, the criine of violating the bed of one's teacher excepted, 
(and) one is freed from that sin (on this condition :) 

3. While abstaining from food during twelve days one must mutter 
in case of sexual intercourse with a member of one's own gotra, 
while abstaining from food during a fortnight when one has 
cohabited with the wife of a friend, 

4. “Bear this away, O waters, whatever" this stanza again. These 
(stanzas) must be muttered, after entering the water, in case of 
these acts. — 

5. Having paid homage to Indra and Vlsnu one must daily offer 
clarified butter with these two suktas (viz. those beginning with) 
“beyond”, if one wishes welfare for oneself. — 

1. After been submerged in water up to the mouth, one must, facing 
the east, (being) well-prepared and pure, worship the sun with the 
two suktas (beginning with) “three". 

2. By a person who is desirous of rain it must be diligently muttered 
without eating: when five days have passed away he will obtain 
much rain. — 

3. Whoever is wronged by his enemies or whoever is falsely accused, 
(that man) must, after fasting for one period of three days, every 
day offer clarified butter, 

4. and he must mutter this sukta, viz. “Indra and Soma” at least a 

whatever law of thine we have violated through thoughtlessness, for that 
sin ( enas ) do not harm us, O god”. 

2-3. According to some dharma-texts (GautDhS. 23, 12; ViSm. 36, 7; Yajfi. 3, 
231) the guilt of intercourse with a woman belonging to the same gotra 
CSippe', family sprung from the same ancestor), or with the wife of a friend 
does not differ from that of violating the teacher's bed. There are, however, 
other texts which impose a milder punishment, and also other illicit connec- 
tions. See Gampert, o.c., p. 134 ff. The stanza RV. 7, 89, 5 (— TaittS. 3, 4, 
11, 6) is considered a purificatory text by Haradatta, the commentator on 
GautDhS. 23, 28 and 25, 7. The latter passage deals with sexual connection 
with a sudra woman. To other Varuna mantras the same force is attributed : 
see also Gampert, o.c., p. 112, n. 1; p. 142, and 150. See, moreover, Manu 
11, 252. 

4. "Bear this away etc.": RV. 1, 23, 22; see on I, 17, 8, Bathing is often 
prescribed: Gampert, o.c., p. 135-150 passim. — These (stanzas): plural in 
the text. 

5. RV. 7, 99 and 100 are referred to, of which BD. 6, 25 says that they are 
addressed to Visnu, though the stanzas 99, 4-6 should be regarded as addressed 
to Indra as well. The contents of the suktas generally express the wish for 
bhftti - "welfare”: see especially 99, 6 and 7; 100, 1; 2; 4. 

1. "Three”: RV. 7, 101 and 102, which are addressed to Parjanya, the god of 
rain. See my Sec. Hymns, p. 317 ff. 



Cl 


hundred times ; he (moreover) must give something to the brahmans 
at the end (of the ceremony): (then) he overthrows all (his) 
enemies. • — 

5. The twice-born man, of whom an observance is, through ignorance 
(error), disturbed, or who comes into contact with vratyas (“religious 
outsiders”), must after fasting offer clarified butter with (the sukta) 
“Agni the upholder of ordinances”. - — 

1. Muttering this (sukta:) “start the sovereign” one must regard the 
sun and worship it when it rises, every day after bathing. 

2. And if a man is prosecuted or involved in a lawsuit with anyone, 
he will, after having got the mastery over his enemies and their 
followers, win the controversy without delay. — 

3. Whilst muttering (the stanza) “happiness Agni with the fires” one 
must take refuge with Vayu (Wind) and Bhaskara (Sun), after 
having, in the first place, praised Agni : (then) one is freed from a 
great trouble. 

4. Whoever, rising in the early morning and having bathed, worships 
during two months with the sukta “surely not”, which consists of 
four stanzas, rescues himself from danger. 

5. Having muttered the text consisting of three stanzas (and beginning 
with) “when”, having bathed and revered the destroyer of castles, 

4. “Indra and Soma” : RV. 7, 104, an imprecation, which, according to BD., 
6, 28, was seen by the sage (f.e. Vasistha) for the destruction of raksas when 
his hundred sons had been slain by the followers of Sudas. The sukta which 
is as good as identical with AV. 8, 4, abounds in terms for oppressing, 
crushing, slaying, piercing and so on. 

5. Vratyas are, in general, adherents of various cults and practices outside the 
society governed by the brahmans and the established dharma. “Thou Agni 
art the upholder of ordinances” (vratapa -) v : btV- 8, 11, addressed to Agni. 

* — Meyer’s conjecture ( 'lubhyet ) is probably superfluous. 

1. “Start . . . the sovereign (i.e. Indra)” : RV. 8, 16, addressed to Indra, and 
no doubt owing this ritual use to the 5th stanza tain . . . adhivdkaya havante 
“they invoke him for advocacy” (adhi-vac- “to speak in favour of a person”). 

3. RV. 8, 18, 9 is referred to. The deities of RV. 8, 18 are the Adityah, except 
for some stanzas. According to the Anuk. and BD. 6, 50 st. 9 is addressed 
to Agni, Surya and Anila (Wind). In this sukta various kinds of evil are 
mentioned, from which the rsi speaking wants to be delivered : enemies, 
disease, physical weakness, distress, malignity, want etc. ; st. 9 reads like 
this: “Agni with the fires must make happiness for us; the sun must shine 
auspiciously etc.”. 

4. “Surely not”: RV. 8, 30, addressed to the Visve devah; in the 3d stanza 
they are invoked to rescue and to help the persons praying Cf. also Qmkh.QS. 
10 , 11 , 8 . 

5. RV. 8, 34, 16-18 are referred to, which, forming part of a sukta addressed 
to Indra, have been seen by the thousand rsis Vasurocis Angirasa (see 



62 


one will attain the wishes sprung from one's mind, (provided that 
one) has (also) honoured the Vasurocis. — 

6. The three suktas at the beginning (of the Rgveda), and the five 
beginning with “at the break the firm one", and also the last six 
suktas, and the (sukta) which (begins with) “Agni the men", 

7. and the section (beginning with) “begin the deeds" — this one must 
recite before eating : (then) one attains all one's wishes and gets rid 
of all sins. 

32. 1. (The man) who regularly mutters this holy text of the great rsis 

who belong to Manu's race in the forenoon before his meal will 
meet the highest success in his affairs. — 

2. Every day in the early morning one must, being pure, mutter the 
sukta dedicated to the Asvins (, beginning with) “with Agni", and 
consisting of twenty-four stanzas, (and in doing so one must,) strict 
in observing one's religious vows, revere the Nasatyas. 

3. Then one will attain the highest prosperity, goods and vigour. — 
With (the sukta) “with fuel" one offers, at each stanza, ghee in 
the fire; 

Macdonell-Keith, II, p. 2 77). — “The destroyer of castles” (Puramdara) : 
Indra. — The triplet relates the receiving of a thousand horses by Indra and 
the person speaking. 

6-7. The texts quoted are RV. 1, 1-3 (see above, note on I, 13, 5 ; 14, 1) ; 10, 1-5 
(addressed to Agni); 10, 185-191 (of which 185 is directed to Aditi, 186 to 
Vayu, 187 to Agni, 188 to Agni Jatavedas, 189 to Sarparajni, who, according 
to BD. 8, 89 “sang of herself (in it)”, and “therefore is the deity in it”, or, 
according to some, to Surya, 191, 1 to Agni, whilst 190 is an evolutional’ 
(bhavavrtta-) sjukta, “to which no superior exists either for prosperity or 
purification” (BD. 8, 92, cf. also RV. 4, 23, 5) and 191, 2-4 is in praise 
of harmony or unanimity (somjmnam) or of knowledge (BD. 8, 93)) ; 7 V 1 
(see above, II, 25, 1), and the 14 suktas (the 3d adhyaya of the 6th astaka of 
the RV.) 8, 32-45 (of which 32-34; 36-37; 45, 2-42 are addressed to Indra, 
35 and 42, 4-6 to the Asvins, 38; 40; 45, 1 to Agni and Indra, 39; 43; 44 
to Agni, 41 and 42, 1-3 to Varuna). These texts are ascribed to various rsis, 
32 1. Manu, the progenitor of mankind, engendered the 10 (or, according to some 

authorities 7) prajapatis (progenitors), who are sometimes considered identical 
with the great rsis. 

2. “With Agni”: RV. 8, 35, addressed to the Asvins Nasatyau), who are 
matutinal gods, brothers of Dawn, and sons of Heaven. They are helpers 
and deliverers from distress in general; see, e.g., Macdonell, VM., p. 51. — 
The words dravina- (“goods, wealth, esp. movable property”) and urj- 
“vigour, strength”, which occur in this RVidh. passage, are found RV. 8, 
35, 10-12. — To the preceding passage cf. also Manu 2, 55. ‘Food, when 
regularly worshipped, gives strength and vigour (fir jam), but eaten irre- 
verently it will destroy them both”. 

3. “With fuel” : RV. 8, 44, addressed to Agni, and ending in the invocation 
“promote long life for us”. 



63 


4. That (man who does so) obtains unequalled success and lives a 
hundred years. Having here won the friendship of him who wields 
the thunderbolt with the sukta which consists of forty-two stanzas 
(and begins with) “hither surely”, 

5. one throws down many rivals with (the aid of) the great Indra. 
Whoever has put a question against the precepts shall eat the food 
of him who mutters (this) ; 

1. therefore this section, which is the section of the morning, is called 
a destroyer of enemies. — By muttering the (sukta) of Vasa and 
the (one beginning with) “great” one gains health. 

2. By muttering, in the early morning, the final (stanzas) which destroy 
(the influence of) evil dreams, one gets rid of evil. (If) one, well- 
prepared and pure, eats food with the two (stanzas) “be auspicious 
to us”, 

3. and touches (one's) heart with the hand, one will live long, (and be) 
free from disease and happy. — From wherever one finds out (that 
there will be) danger, in that direction one must, observing one’s 
vows, 

4. on a clean spot put wood on the fire, revere Indra and sacrifice. 
(Then) one must with the six stanzas “of which” present purified 
melted butter and perfumes, 

5. and, after having fasted for a day and a night, offer rice boiled in 
milk or the beverage got by churning coagulated milk, or cakes, or 
sesam-seeds, or also ghee. — 

4. “Hither surely” : RV. 8, 45, addressed to Indra (according to the Anuk. st. 1 
is directed to Agni and Indra). Cf. st. 3 and 8, in which Indra is said or 
asked to drive together the host of the enemies or to rout the assailants. — 
Who wields the thunderbolt ( vajrin -) : Indra. 

5. Against avidhanaiahl ; Mss. ATBCDEF read vidhanatah , Meyer’s text 

’ pramanatah . — Cf. Manu 2, 111. 

1. “The sukta of Vasa” : RV. 8, 46, seen by Vasa Asvya, partly addressed to 
Indra, partly to Vayu, praising them and calling in divine assistance; see 
also BD. 6, 79 and 80. See also AitAr. 5, 2, 5. — “Great”: the first word 
of RV. 8, 47, of which st. 1-13 ask the Adityas for aid and protection. 

2. RV. 8, 47, 14-18 are addressed to the Adityas and Usas. Beginning in this 
way: “The dream which bodes evil to our kine and to us, carry that, O 
Daughter of Heaven, far away . . ”, they are held to remove the evil con- 
sequences of bad dreams. AsvGS. 3, 6, 5 and Sayana on RV. 8, 47, 14, for 
that purpose, prescribe the use of these verses, while worshipping the sun. 
— “Be auspicious to us”: RV. 8, 48, 4 and 5, addressed to Soma, and 
invoking the god to be beneficent, to protect, and to prolong the life of the 
person speaking cum suis. 

4. “Of which” : RV. 8, 50, 13-18 : “Of which we are afraid, O Indra, grant 
us security against that . . . Indra is our protector, may he help us”. 



1. With (the sukta) “let intoxicate you” one will, after bathing and 
offering, destroy (one’s) enemies. — (A person who is) confined or 
shut up must, restraining his speech and well-prepared, mutter 

2. the sukta “now those”, the divinity of which are the Adityas ; (then) 
he will immediately be freed from his imprisonment. — Restrained 
and pure, one must regularly mutter the pragatha “if skies” : 

3. that (man) gains unparalleled x*enown and attains all (his) desires. — 
Having sacrificed with the sukta “thou us, O Agni”, and having 
honoured the fire with ghee, 

4. (being) protected from all sides by splendour, one will, through 
Agni, gain property. — With the sukta “towards then” one must 
continually beg wealth of the destroyer of castles : 

5. to the (man who does so), holding fuel in the hands, the slayer of 
V rtra gives wealth. — (The man who), restrained, continually mut- 
ters the sukta “a girl to the water” 

1. will quickly deliver, from that (disease), a woman who suffers from 
skin-disease and is not covered with hair. — By praising the 
destroyer of castles with (the stanza) “over whatsoever today”, when 
the sun has risen, 

1. "'Let intoxicate you” : RV. 8, 53, addressed to Indra. Cf. st. 5 “Thou hast, 
for the good of those who praise Thee, destroyed even the mountain . . ; 
st. 2 “Press down niggards . . .”. 

2. “Now those” : RV. 8, 56, addressed to the Adityas. According to the story 
related by the author of BD., 6, 88 ff. fishermen caught fish in the Sarasvati 
and threw them upon the dry land; but the fish praised the sons of Aditi, 
who released them and promised the fishermen that they should not starve 
and obtain heaven. The Anuk. and Sayana on RV. 8, 67 allude to similar 
stories. The sukta invokes the Adityas for aid, protection and liberation. — 
“If skies” : RV. 8, 59, 5 and 6, addressed to Indra and praising his power : 
“If a hundred skies, O Indra, were thine and a hundredfold earth, then a 
thousand suns . . . would not equal you”. Cf. PB. 12 f 4, If. “ . . . possessed 
of hundred and thousand is the characteristic of cattle; through these (verses) 
he retains the ch. of c.”. 

3. “Thou us, 0 Agni”: RV. 8, 60, addressed to Agni, invoking the god's pro- 
tection and entreating him for wealth. 

4. RV. 8, 70 is referred to, which, being addressed to Indra, invokes the god's 
liberality and states that he usually gives much. — “Slayer of V.” : Indra. 

5. ‘A girl (going, to the water”: RV. 8, 80. According to the well-known tra- 
dition (see Macdonell, BD., p.236) the girl Apala suffered from skin-disease. 
Indra fell in love with her. Taking a water-pot she went to fetch water. 
Seeing Soma at the edge of the water (st. 1), she praised him and pressed 
him in her mouth. Then she asked Indra to make her fair-skinned (st. 4-6), 
Passing her between the body of the car and the yoke, he drew her forth 
thrice. Then she became fair-skinned (cf., e.g., BD. 6, 99 ff.). See Gonda, 
SecHymns, p. 328 f. 

1. RV. 8, 82, 4 “Over whatsoever Thou hast today risen, killing enemies, 0 



65 


2. (a man by) reciting frightens away an enemy or makes the world 
obedient. — Who, clinging to his observances, reveres Gaurl with 
the two stanzas “when Speech”, 

3. from the mouth of that (man) no uncultivated speech whatever 
comes forth. — After seeing the sun one must adore it whilst 
reciting the two stanzas “in truth, great” ; 

4. even if he speaks (has spoken) untrue speech that (one) is not 
stained by untruth. When the moon is full one shall worship the 
moonshine with (the stanza) “this which” ; 

5. (then) one will become moon-looking ? (like the moon or lovely to 
the sight), not winking (watchful), vigorous, in the possession of 
sight (intelligence). By muttering (the stanza) “descendants truly” 
after bathing one does not re-enter a womb (one is not born again). 


Sun, all that, O Indra, is in your power”. The stanza (and the sukta in 
general) is addressed to Indra. SVidh. 2, 4, 8 prescribes using this stanza in 
the early morning to be well off all day long. — Cf. also I, 24, 5. 

2. RV. 8, 89, 10 and 11, addressed to Vac “Speech”, call her divine, queen of 
the gods and a milker of vigour. For this goddess in RV. see Macdonell, 
VM., p. 124; Keith, RPh. p. 199 and Index, p. 671. In TaittBr. 2, 4, 6, 11 
the stanza RV. 1, 164, 41, in which the word gauri “the yellowish one” 
occurs, follows RV. 8, 89, 10 and 11 and according to Naigh. 1, 11 this 
word is another name for Vac. Gauri is at first the wife of Varuna; in 
the Mbh;, 3, 231, 48, she belongs to a group of inferior female divinities 
(Vidya “knowledge” etc.) accompanying Parvati (Uma, Qiva’s wife). But 
elsewhere (3, 84, 151) she is Uma-Parvatl herself, who, in other texts, is 
often called by this name. 

3. Uncultivated: I refer to my remarks: New Indian Antiquary, Thomas Fest- 
schrift, p. 107 ff. — RV. 8, 90, 11 and 12, addressed to Surya, and stating 
the greatness and glory of that deity. 

4. “This which” : RV. 8, 90, 13, which, according to the Anukr. is either 
directed to Usas or forms a hymn of praise of the splendour of the sun, 
according to BD. 6, 126, however, is addressed to Usas or in praise of the 
light of the sun and moon: “She, bending down, radiant with light, like a 
(woman) strikingly beautiful . . 

5. “Descendants truly” : RV. 8, 90, 14, addressed to (Soma) Pavamana. When 
passing through the strainer Soma, the extracted intoxicating juice, is usually 
called pavamana - “flowing off clearly”. For Soma see Macdonell, VM., 
p. 104 ft. The stanza reads like this : “Three descendants, truly, have passed 
beyond, others settled down around the sun (light, fire); the firm one 
remained within the worlds, the one who flows off clearly entered the 
fawn-coloured ones (the horses of the suit)”. After mentioning that the 
stanza refers to Pavamana BD. 6, 128 f. goes on offering choice: “Or in 
padas ab Agni is named, in c the Sun, in d the Middle (i e. Agni) is praised”, 
whilst adding that AitAr. (2, 1, 1) gives the same explanation. AitAr., l.c. 
says that of old those who diverged from the sacrifice, brahman and the 
truth were overcome; “those who settled round the sun are again settled 
round here”. 


5 



6. But by touching a cow whilst muttering (the stanza) “the mother” 
one obtains cows. And by muttering the (stanza) “eloquent” one 
obtains speech. — 

7. One shall mutter this supreme ninth mandala relating to the 
clarifying Soma after bathing, pure, on a pure spot, together with 
a strainer and gold. 

Ill 

1. A twice-born man must mutter the gayatri-stanzas relating to the 
clarifying Soma, viz. (that beginning with) “with the sweetest” (and 
so on). He must mutter the pre-eminent means of purification, (viz. 
these) stanzas connected with the clarifying Soma, 

2. (being) well-prepared and having quickly plunged into water : (then) 
he gets rid of all sin. Mentioning these (stanzas) is auspicious, and 
also handing (them) down and keeping (them) in the memory. 

3. By understanding (them) according to truth one attains to the 
world of brahman. And these above mentioned (stanzas are charac- 
terized by) any extremely excellent (property) : 

4. as a result of reciting (them) one becomes pure, by handing (them) 
down one remembers what is the highest, by keeping (them) in the 

QB. 2, 5, 1, 1 ff. explains the stanza in connection with the creation of 
living beings; three races of beings created by Prajapati having passed away 
(cf. pada a), the fourth group continued to exist and settled around the 
fire (cf. pada b); the firm one who remained within the worlds is said, 
according to QB., with regard to Prajapati, and the fawn-coloured ones are 
the quarters of the sky. A stanza which is for the greater part identical is 
found AthV, 10, 8, 3, forming part of the Skambha hymns (see my Brahman, 
p. 43) which represent brahman as the fulcrum or frame of the universe 
in which are both the existent and the non-existent and lead up to the 
Upanisadic thought. 

6. “The mother”: RV. 8, 90, IS refers to the Cow, Aditi (Macdonell, VAT, 
p, 122): “Do not kill the sinless Cow”. — “Eloquent”: RV. 8, 90, 16 
likewise applies to the Cow, who is stated to be eloquent and to raise 
her voice. 

7. The whole of the 9th mandala of the RV. being dedicated to the 'clarifying' 

( pavamana -) Soma, this section is called pdvamdna ~ “relating to the Soma- 
juice, while being purified by a strainer”. Thus the Sarvanukr. : navamain 
mandalam, pdvamanam saumyam. Hence the use of the strainer is clear. — 
“Gold” : in this 9th book the epithet 'gold-coloured' is often applied to Soma. 

Ill 

1. The suktas referred to are RV. 9, 1-67, which, a few stanzas excepted, are 
composed in the gayatrl metre, — “With the sweetest”: the opening of 
RV. 9, 1. 



67 


memory one goes, of purified personality and having subdued one’s 
organs of sense, to the state of being brahman; 

5. and by understanding (them) according to truth one attains to the 
highest place of brahman. One must have it recited by brahmans 
who have first enjoyed food, to the image of the god(?). 

1. (Thus) one pleases the godhead and one causes that rite to succeed. 
Being recited during the ritual accompanying the oblations to the 
ancestors by a person whose soul is well-prepared they please the 
forefathers. — 

2. Even if one has committed very great sins and has given way to 
drink (drinks which) are not to be drunk and so on, one becomes 
pure after three days by entering water and muttering the sukta 
characterized by (the opening) “the inspiriting has passed”, 

3. and (by doing so) an undecaying, excellent sweet drink will be 
given to the ancestors. — (The man) who, of purified soul and of 
subdued senses, turns his mind towards the stanzas connected with 
the clarifying Soma, 

4. is served by the cows which become (for him cows) which yield 
what he wishes. (Being) pure, he obtains a (long) life, strength, 
glory, property, offspring, renown, health, 

5. (and) unparalleled, imperishable merits of the study of the Veda. 
If, however, one is incapable (of reciting them all) one must, 
attentive, mutter the thirty stanzas of Vaikhanasa, 

5. Is this the intention of the author {sravayed devatakrtye brdhmandn )? 

2. The text refers to RV. 9, 58 which is often prescribed by the authors of 
dharma-texts : ViSm. 56, 6 (in a list of the purifying mantras from all the 
Vedas) ; GautDhS. 20, 12 uses it in the case of the purification of an outcast 
sinner (murderer of a learned brahman, etc.). It is repeatedly used to purify 
a man who has accepted a gift which ought not to be accepted (viz. a gift 
offered by a man blameworthy on account of his caste or of his deeds etc.) : 
GautDhS. 24, 2; Manu 11, 253; cf. also SVidh. 2, 1, 7. Yaska Nir. 13, 6 
gives the following interpretation of the 1st stanza: “The inspiriting (an 
epithet of Soma) passes across (i.e. overcomes all evil), who praises, runs 
(i.e. goes the upward way) with the stream of the pressed (Soma) plant 
which has been purified by mantras”. — See also III, 3, 3. 

3. “The man who studies (turns the mind towards, knows) the verses relating 
to the clarifying Soma, essence brought together by the rsis, eats all that 
is pure ... for him Sarasvati milks (yields) milk, clarified butter, honey, 
water” : RV. 9, 67, 31 and 32, which, according to BD. 6, 133, are in praise 
of the student of recitation. 

5. Vaikhanasa: according to Sayana, on RV. 9, 66 the V. formed a group of 
a hundred seers. On them see W. Caland, Over het Vaikhanasasutra, Proc. 
Royal Acad. Amsterdam 1926, and On the sacred books of the Vaikhanasas, 
ibid. 1928. The idea of purifying is repeatedly expressed in this sukta. 
Compare, further, st. 19 “drive away calamity”; 30 “be favourable”. 



6. and (those) which are proclaimed by the seven rsis, and the following 
(stanzas) which belong to Pavitra. — These sixty-two stanzas 
(beginning with) “flow off clearly” which are proclaimed by the 
best of seers 

1. lead to the destruction of all kinds of stains (sins), to purification, 
and to happiness. With this (exposition) the sixty-seven suktas 
(beginning with) “with the sweetest” have been mentioned (treated). 

2. They comprise six hundred and ten stanzas, relating to the clarifying 
Soma. By muttering them whilst sacrificing one will overcome the 
awful danger of death 

3. and one attains complete relief from diseases; there is no doubt. 
The man who, having accepted presents which ought not to be 
accepted, or having eaten forbidden food, 

4. mutters the (sukta) characterized by (the opening) “the inspiriting 
has passed” and enters water, is pure after three days. This is the 
highest (text) connected with the clarifying Soma, a remover of 
physical defects. 

5. Having restrained ones breath one must in the end meditate on 
gods, ancestors and rsis. And after fasting one must offer clarified 
butter and pay homage to Agni and Soma, 

6. and honour Sarasvatl with (gifts of) milk, water, honey, and 
clarified butter. — (The man who,) after bathing and (being) pure, 
has muttered the sukta “thine strainer” which relates to the 
individual, 

6. ‘By the seven rsis” : the 7 triplets RV. 9, 67, 1-21 are traditionally attributed 
to the 7 rsis Bharadvaja, Kasyapa, Gotama, Atri, Visvamitra, Jamadagni, 
Vasistha respectively. While the RV. sometimes mentions the definite group 
of “the seven seers”, who are divine and associated with the gods, the CB. 
(14, 5, 2, 6) gives them individual names and regards them as the 7 stars of 
the Great Bear (2, 1, 2, 4), — The seer of RV. 9, 67, 22-23 is Pavitra 
Angirasa or Vasistha, or both of them. The idea of purifying often occurs 
in this sukta. 

6. “Flow off clearly” : the opening of RV. 9, 66. 

1. See note on III, 1, 1. 

2 610: this number tallies with the actual sum total. 

3. See above, III, 2, 2. St. 3cd and 4 a are identical with Manu 11, 253a-c; cf. 
also GautDhS. 24, 2. 

6. “Thine strainer”: RV. 9, 83. The Anukr. attributes this sukta, the seer of 
which is Pavitra Angirasa, to Pavamana Soma. BD. 9, 134, however, calls 
it a hymn of praise of the Kettle Qj/iarma) as representing the Sun ( surya -) 
and the Person (atman-). This hymn, which occurs among the texts of the 
Soma ritual, is used by AftBr. 7, 9, 3 as an expiation for errors in the 
sacrifice, by SVidh. 1, 5, 15 as an expiation for drinking spirituous liquor; 
it is a &odhanammtr/Ch "a purifying mantra” (Comm, on PB. 1, 2, 8). As 



69 


k 1. attains the happy condition he desires and acquires prosperity in 
this world. — One must, having fasted, mutter the mandala relating 
to the clarifying Soma a hundred thousand times : 

2. (then) one will indeed destroy the (sin of) killing a brahman, 
according to the word of Vasistha, — At the time of death one 
must mutter the suktas (beginning with) “variously” once. 

3. And by muttering it one goes to the highest abode and to immortal 
life. — The sukta “O Waters, ye are” must always be muttered by 
a twice-born man, who has restrained himself. 

4. For the sake of bathing and if he is desirous of purity he shall 
mutter it thrice, (whilst being) concentrated. And after having dived 
into water one shall, well-concentrated, repeat it aloud thrice, 

5. The slayer of a brahman must, while communicating his deed, 

to the effect expected in RVidh. cf. st. 1 in which there is question of 
reaching (a goal; the meaning is not entirely clear) and st, 5 “As a king, 
having the strainer as your chariot thou gainedst wealth . . . and winnedst 
glory”. 

4 2. “Variously”: RV. 9, 112-114 are referred to. For the interpretation of these 

suktas see Gonda, SecHymns, p, 325 ff, ; 335 f. The second part of sukta 113 
is a prayer for amrfatva - “not-dying” : “Where is unextinguishable light, in 
the vrorld where the sunlight is placed, put me, O thou that art purified, 
in that world which is free from death and imperishable”. In my opinion 
we should between the lines of 112 read: Tndra, give them (us) the things 
they (we) long for, each in his own way”. With reference to 112 the tradition 
is handed down that during a drought Indra asked the seers by what activity 
they lived; £isu, son of Angiras, declared it him with RV, 9, 112: “a cart, 
a field, kine, tillage, water which does not flow away, a forest, the sea, a 
mountain, a king, by these means we live” (see BD. 6, 137 ff., and Macdonell, 
BD, p. 245 f.), — See also the Atmabodha Up. (translated by P. Deussen, 
Sechzig Upanishaden, Leipzig 1897, p. 750 f.). 

3. “O Waters, ye are” : the sukta quoted is RV. 10, 9, which, according to the 
Anukr., is attributed to Trisiras Tvastra or to Sindhudvipa Ambarisa. 
According to the tradition handed down by BD. 6, 149 ff, Indra, after striking 
off the three heads of Trisiras whom he regarded as being sent by the asuras 
among the gods, was besprinkled by the rsi Sindhudvipa who then, for the 
removal of that sin, pronounced this sukta. See also III, 5, 4. The deity 
addressed is the Waters, which are said to be delighting and to be masters 
of desirable objects and invoked to set the person speaking cum suis “unto 
refreshment”, to make them share in their most propitious savour, to grant 
them remedies and to work out their protection: “to see the sun for a long 
time”. The hymn which is often used (see e.g. Whitney-Lanman, AV., p. 5) 
is prescribed for addressing the bathing-place (duties of a householder, ritual 
bath, ViSm. 64, 18; cf. also SVidh. 1, 2, 5), for fetching and announcing the 
water for washing the hands (as a part of the Visnu ceremonial ViSm. 65, 3) ; 
the verses are pronounced during a krcchra (see above, I, 3, 2) etc. — See 
note I, 3, 5 (and I, 11, 4); IV, 25, 2. 

4. Cf. IV, 23, 5; 24, 1. 

5. “Slayer of a brahman”: cf. the story mentioned above (III, 4, 3; BD. 6, 152 



wander about for twelve years, bearing a skull and a club shaped 
like the foot of a bedstead and covered in a cloth of bark, 

6. (and) without muttering he shall, in thought only, recollect (the 
sukta) “0 Waters, ye are”. But after the fifth year he must mutter 
it, a thousand times. 

7. And another muttering, amounting to three thousand times, must 
be (performed), always every day. Then, when the twelfth year has 
been completed, the murderer of a brahman is freed (from his sin), 

5. 1. after he has gone to (an assembly of) brahmans. Then they shall 

say: To him, when he has performed his vow: “Is there perhaps 
anything that has not been performed ? If he speaks falsely, he will 
fall again ! 

2. By speaking an untruth you will kill ten later (members of your 
family), and ten preceding (in the genealogical line)”. (Then) he 
must say : “om bhoh”, and after being allowed by the brahmans (to 
depart etc.) he must, being pure, mutter. 

3. And he must prepare a cooked offering ( sthallpaha -) for Agni who 
practises observances (or: proceeds in accordance with ordinances). 
And in this way he gets rid of sin, when he has resorted to the 
Savitri. 

4. Sakra was formerly a murderer of a brahman, because he had slain 
the son of Tvastr (who was) an rsi and a prince. Sindhudvlpa liber- 
ated him (from that sin) by sprinkling him with these (stanzas). 

5. Having stolen the property of a brahman or an object of possession 
of one’s spiritual teacher one gets rid (of sin) in six years by mut- 
tering these (stanzas) according to this rule. 

Indra is called a brahman-slayer). — “Skull": cf. Manu 11, 73; skull and the 
particular club: BaudhDhS. 2, 1, 1, 2. To this passage in general compare 
Manu 11, 72-89; GautDh. chapter 22; SVidh. 1, 5, 15 f., and Gampert, o.c., 
p 55 ff. — By confession a sinner is freed from guilt (Manu 11, 228). — 
Twelve years: in the same way BaudhDhS. 2 , 1, 1 , 2; ipDhS. 1, 10, 28, 11; 
GautDhQ. 22, 4; Manu, 11, 73 etc. 

5. 1 and 2. A similar dialogue is mentioned SVidh. 1, 5, 15. 

2. Manu 8 , 97 ff. sets forth how many relatives one destroys by giving false 
evidence in several particular cases. 

3 . Sthalipaka: see above, I, 5, 1. — Savitri: see I, 3, 4. — Observances: the 
text has Agnayc vratacarlnc; cf. 5.V. 2, 8 , 3. 

4. Son of Tvastr, viz. Trisiras, see above, note on III, 4, 2. — Cakra : Indra. — 
“With these (stanzas)”: viz. RV. 10, 9, designated as the apohisfhtyah (sc. 
rcah) in several texts. — Sindhudvlpa : see above, III, 4, 3. — Cf. also Meyer, 
p. XXVIII. 

5. Cf. Manu 11, 98 ff. and other texts discussed by Gampert, o.c., p. 120 if.; 
see also SVidh. 1, 5, 16, and 6 , 1. 



71 


j. 1. The murderer of a brahman who is also a drinker of spirituous 
liquor is freed (from sin) like a brahman-killer by muttering them 
according to this same practice and under fixed restrictions. 

2. Having, when angry, raised (a stick) against a brahman and thrown 
him down, one must mutter them. During three days one must fast 
after throwing down (a brahman), and during one day after 
threatening him. 

4. When one has, in any way, spilled blood by a stroke one must also 
fast for three days, and mutter these (stanzas) after having begged 
his pardon. 

4. After rising early in the morning one must perpetually perform a 
cleansing of one’s own person : (this is) the expiation of the unknown 
evil done (the evil contracted unwittingly) in the night. 

5. And in the evening one must regularly perform a cleansing of one’s 
own person with these (stanzas) : (this is) the expiation of the 
unknown evil done (the evil contracted unwittingly) by day. — 

7. 1. A twice-born man must worship king Yama with the sukta (RV. 

10, 14) and in two fortnights prepare a mess of cooked food for 
Yama (as the divinity to whom it is given). 

2. And on the eighth and the fourteenth one must worship Yama with 
an offering. Then one must apply this sukta “him who has passed 
away”. 

3. Verily (the man who does so) will in no way die before the (end 
of a full) life-time. Yama is pleased with him and at last gives him 
memory. 

i. 10. For the spirit-drinker see Gampert, o.c., p. 103 ff. The oldest dharma-texts 
prescribe other suktas in this case (I refer to Gampert, o.c., p. 108). — 
Brahman-killer : sic ; the word is, however, ambiguous (II, 25, 4). 

2. For the offence of raising a stick against a brahman etc. see Manu 4, 164 ff.; 

11, 205 ff.; Yajn. 3, 293; ViSm. 54, 14; SVidh. 1, 7, 4; 1, 5, 6-9, and other 
texts discussed by Gampert, o.c. p. 166 ff. 

3. “Him” : the person whose blood has been shed. 

4. Rising etc. : compare Gampert, o.c., p. 191. 

1. 1. The sukta of which the first word is quoted in st. 2 is RV. 10, 14; ParGS. 

3, 10, 9 and Yajn. 3, 2 designate it as Yamasukta. BD. 6, 155 gives the 
following account of its contents; Yama is praised, but in st. 6 the Fathers 
( pitaras ) and other groups are praised together, because they are divinities 
connected with heaven; in 7-9 prayers for the deceased man are uttered. 
Several verses of the sukta are used to accompany the eleven oblations to 
Yama, offered in the pitrmedha (ritual disposal of the dead) after the lighting 
of the funeral pile; see KausS. 81, 34 ff., and W. Caland, Die altindischen 
Todten- und Bestattungsgebrauche, Amsterdam 1896, p. 64. — “King Yama” : 
see RV. 10, 14 passim. 

3. Memory, viz. of past births. 


72 


4. At the end of the mantra one must offer an oblation saying: „hail 
(svaha) to Dharmaraja”. On the full-moon day of (the month) 
Vaisakha one should regularly perform the rite. 

5. Who after bathing on the days of the changes of the moon during 
the sun’s course between the solstitial points gives water with 
sesamum to Yama and his followers, does not feel fear from 
them. — 

6. A twice-born man must resort to Mrtyu (Death) by muttering 
“distant, 0 Death”, eating (only) by night, always moderate in diet 
during a full year : 

8. 1, Mrtyu does not lead him (i.e. the man who does so) away together 

with his sons and offspring before the (end of a full) life-time. (A 
man who) lives on fruits and eats sparingly will overcome death 
in (after) three years. 

2. The sixth time (i.e. at the end of the third day only) one must eat 
fruit or also a root (roots). One must alternatively stand, sit down 
and move on ; one must dwell in cool water. 

3. In summer one must expose oneself to the heat of five fires, during 
the rainy season one must live under the open sky (exposing oneself) 
to rain. When active in this way one will overcome death and get 
rid of diseases. 

4. When the husband is dead, let the brother-in-law (husband's 
brother), for the sake of offspring, lead back with (the stanza) “rise 
up” the wife of a brother who has no son, when she wishes to 
mount (the funeral pyre) after him (viz. the dead husband). 

4, Svaha: an exclamation pronounced in making oblations to the gods, ± "may 
a blessing rest on it". — Dharmaraja- -Yama, the god who rules (or 
presides over) the dead ancestors. — Vaisakha: one of the twelve months 
(AprihMay), sometimes reckoned as the first month of the year. Compare, 
in this connection, the remarks made by Meyer, Trilogie, I, p. 188 f. 

5. See also III, 14, 6. Instead of "the sun’s course" ( ayanc ) Meyer suggests „with 
this (stanza)" ( anaya ). 

6! "Distant, 0 Death": RV. 10, 18: st. 1-4 are ‘in praise of 1 Death (Mrtyu), 
of which the 3rd prays for life for those who have escaped death (BD. 
7, 10 f.). The stanzas 7 ff. refer to particular parts of the funeral rites (see 
BD. 7, 12 ff.). Compare st. 1 and 2 with the use prescribed by RVidh. ; "Go 
away, 0 Death, along a distant road ... I speak to Thee that hast sight (and) 
hearing, do not harm our offspring and heroes . . . Setting for you (assuming), 
further, a long life-time, increasing in progeny and riches, become pure and 
cleansed, 0 yon who are worthy of sacrifice!" — Notice the discrepancy 
between III, 7, 6 (one year) and 8, 1 (three years). 

8 2 and 3. One must. . . stand = Manu, 6, 22 c; in summer id, 6, 23 ab; cf. also ViSm. 
95, 2 and 3; Yajn. 3, 51 and 52. — "Five fires": four fires and the sun. 

4. “Rise up (0 woman)": RV. 10, 18, 8 "Rise up, to the world of the living, 



73 


5. But when the proper time after the menstruation has come he shall, 
being anointed with clarified butter and restraining his speech, beget 
one son, by no means a second. — 

6. For the sake of expiation one must record the (stanza) “auspicious 
us” which contains ten syllables (or: the sukta, beginning with 
^auspicious us” which is characterized by a stanza containing ten 
syllables). One shall mutter it regularly, being pure: then one will 
obtain mental ease. 

1. Let a person subsist on fruit during a month, and let him then 
drink (only) water during a month, let him subsist on air, during 
a month, muttering this text a thousand times 

2. only in thought. (Then) all the wishes he strives after are fulfilled 
to him : he sees (even) the gandharvas, the siddhas and the caranas. 

3. He disappears (i.e. becomes able to disappear at will), he becomes 
(able to depart) from this world through the atmosphere. He sees 
from afar and he hears from afar like one who stands in the highest 
place (i.e. like a supreme deity). — 

you lie near this one who is deceased. Come, to him who grasps your hand, 
your second husband, you have now entered into the relation of wife to 
husband”. The application of this stanza given by RVidh. is quite intelligible, 
and in harmony with the direction of AsvGS. 4, 2, 18 “her husband’s brother, 
who is the representative of her husband, a pupil (viz. of her husband), or an 
aged servant makes her rise” and other texts ; Kaus. 80, 45 only states : “one 
makes her rise”, to which the commentary adds : “if she desires to live in this 
world again”. I refer to Caland, o.c., p. 43. For BD. (7, 13) see Macdonell, 
BD., p. 255. 

5. This stanza which appears to be interpolated (see Meyer, p. VI), is for the 
greater part identical with Manu 9, 60, which belongs to a set of stanzas 
dealing with the authorization of a woman to obtain, in particular cases, 
offspring by cohabitation with a brother-in-law etc. 

6. The text referred to is RV. 10, 20, 1 which begins with a single ‘quarter’ 
(pada) instead of a stanza. BD. 7, 21 agrees in considering this line of 10 
syllables as intended to avert evil, and adds that it is manasa- (cf. RVidh. 6 d) 
“connected with mind”. It reads like this; “Excite us auspicious mind”. See 
also Meyer, p. XXVIII. 

1. Austerity and food restrictions lead to the achievement of such faculties as 
transporting oneself instantaneously anywhere. 

2. Cf. such texts as SVidh. 3, 7, 3 and 9, 1 (if, after a long observance etc., 
one sees divine beings one can be sure that the end is attained). — See also 
A. Danielou, Aoga, London 1949, p. 83 ft.; 137 ft . — Gandharvas: divine 
musicians, skilled in medicine etc, see Hopkins, EM., p. 152 ff. — Siddhas : 
a class of semi-divine beings of great perfection, endowed with supranormal 
powers and said to inhabit celestial regions. — Caranas; heavenly singers. — 
The words “only in thought” may also be connected with “strives after”. 

3. “Moving through the atmosphere” : SVidh. 3, 9, 1. See also M. Eliade, Yoga, 
Paris-Bucarest 1936, p. 129 f. ; 153 etc. 



74 


4. Having restrained oneself one must mutter (the sukta) “forth to 
the gods” in desert lands, when peril of death has drawn near: 
(then) one immediately finds water. 

5. One shall make fragrant with perfumes three dice coming from 
the vibhidaka tree, and, having put them in the open air, strew 
them with flowers. 

10. 1. Then, that night, having put his feet together, he shall, standing up, 

mutter the praise of dice, and he shall, in the night, mutter in 
thought the (first) stanza (of that sukta, beginning with) “the 
dangling ones me”. 

2. Then, at daybreak, when the sun has risen, while praising (the said 
text) he shall go to the gambling-place. He shall constantly mutter 
this (stanza) : then he will vanquish, not be vanquished by others. 

3. He shall touch the very man whom he wishes to conquer on the 
head and mutter the rest of the sukta : then he will vanquish other 
men, not be vanquished by anybody. — 

4. One must mutter the two (suktas) “They are awake” and “dawn 
and night” at a ceremony for blessing ( svastyayana -). (The sukta 
beginning with) “adoration to the eye of Mitra and Varuna” (must 
be muttered) constantly. 

4. RV. 10, 30, which is addressed to the Waters and, according to AitBr. 2, 19, 
was seen by Kavasa Ailusa, who, being the child of a slave woman, was 
driven away from a sacrifice and sent to the wilderness where he was afflicted 
by thirst. 

5. Vibhidaka: the tree terminalia bellerica, the seeds of which are used as dice. 

10. 1. “Praise of dice”: RV. 10, 34 which is also designated as “Blame of the 

gambler’’. According to BD. 7, 37 part of the stanzas of this sukta praise 
the dice, part of them blame them or admonish the gambler. This beautiful 
poem describes the hard lot of the gambler who, unable to resist the fascination 
of the dice, deplores the ruin he has brought on himself and his family. See 
Gonda, SecHymns, p. 342 ff. Although the text of the sukta itself does not 
give us many arguments in favour of the view that it would always have been 
‘an incantation for success with dice’, the ‘author’ of the RVidh. considers it 
a magic means to come off victorious in the gambling-place. The final stanza, 
addressed to the dice : "... be gracious to us ; do not forcibly bewitch us 
with magical power ; . . . let your enmity now come to rest . . .” may have 
originally expressed the gambler’s desire to release him for good and all from 
the power of the dice. See Gonda, o.c., p. 344. — “The dangling ones me”: 
RV. 10, 34, 1. 

2. “Vanquish”; cf. RV. 10, 34, 6. 

3. “The rest...”: RV. 10, 34, 2-14. 

4. "They are awake” : RV. 10, 35 is meant. “Dawn and night” : RV. 10, 36. — 
Svastyayana, see above (I, 22, 4). — These two suktas are addressed to the 
All-gods. The word svasti “well-being, prosperity” occurs in the refrain of 35, 
3-12; 36 asks the gods for help, safety, protection etc. — “Adoration...”: RV. 



75 



5. Of this (sukta) one stanza is the best, by which one is freed from 
sins. With that (stanza) one must regularly offer clarified butter: 
(then) one is freed from sins. — 

1. Let (a man,) endowed with faith, mutter the sukta (beginning with) 
“from the sky” : (then) he wins faith everywhere, wishing faith and 
concentrated. 

2. Let (the man) who is bewildered on an inaccessible (stretch of) way 
mutter (the sukta beginning with) : “let us not go away” : then he 
goes happily on his way and obtains the highest ease (joy). • — 

3. If one might think of some dear friend that his life draws to a 
close, one must, after bathing, touch his head (whilst muttering the 
sukta beginning with) “your to Yama” 

4. and one must during five days mutter it a thousand times : then he 
will receive a (full) life-time. With the sukta of Sindhudvlpa one 
must anoint him with ghee. 

10, 37, addressed to Surya. As Rodhe (o.c., p. 46) correctly remarks the stanzas 
6 and 7 of this sukta fairly typically express the main contents of the Rgveda : 
“May we not suffer want in the sight of Surya. May we live happily and 
reach old age. Every day, with fine spirits and clear eyes, rich in offspring, 
free from sickness, free from sin, may we, living long, day by day behold 
thee, Surya, rich in friends, when thou risest”. — Compare the ritual use 
of RV. 10, 37, 4-12 as prescribed by AsvGS. 3, 7, 1-2. 

5. The text has in view RV. 10, 37, 12: “If, O gods, we have committed some 
grievous offense ( devaliedana -) with the tongue or with thoughtlessness, lay, 
O Vasus, that sin upon the hostile one, who leads us into evil”. 

1. “From the sky” : RV. 10, 45, addressed to AgnL This is the so-called 
Vatsapra-sukta which is fairly often prescribed under various circumstances, 
and, according to QBv. 6, 7, 4, 1 ff. is a means of creating vital power 
( ayusyam ). The gods having fashioned the diksa (consecration for a religious 
ceremony) from out of sraddha (‘faith’) (QBr. 12, 1, 2, 1; cf. 12, 8, 2, 4ff. 
s. is the appearance of the diksa), and the Vatsapra-sukta being used during 
the diksa (cf. also such texts as ManGS. 1, 23, 11), there is a connection 
between the sukta and ‘faith’. 

2. The reading of the Mss. A-C (scimftdho) may mean either “with a fool or 
bewildered man” or “brought or pressed together”. I have adopted Meyer’s 
suggestion sammudho “bewildered” (now found in DE) : cf. BD. 7, 84. — 
RV. 10, 57, addressed to the All-gods, and beginning with these words “Let 
us not go away from (leave) the path, not [from] the Soma sacrifice”; the 
text further asks for a long life, offspring etc. BD. 7, 90 calls it a “spell for 
good luck” (Macdonell) : svastyayanam. 

3-4. The text refers to RV. 10, 58 which is called a manadvartanam “means of 
bringing back the spirit” in the Anukr. This sukta is, BD. 7, 84 ff. says, 
connected with a story: King Asamati, having dismissed his domestic priests 
Bandhu c.s., made Kirata and Akuli their successors. Having become pigeons 
and having gone against the Gaupayanas, they attacked one of them, Subandhu 
(Sayana, on RV. 10, 58 who mentions another version of this story informs 
us that Subandhu was a colleague of Bandhu and that they were Gaupayanas). 


76 


5. Lying- on a couch one must regularly mutter tin's mantra. Then one 
must touch one’s sons, wife, another person dear (to oneself), (or) 
oneself. 

12. 1. One must constantly recite this ‘return of life’. (Doing so and) 

anointing all the apertures of the body with ghee one becomes happy 
and free from pain. — 

2. The mantra “this thus” is called “winning a thousand”. During a 
half month (one shall subsist) on sacrificial food, during a half 
month one shall drink milk, 

3. and after fasting the following fortnight in the wilderness, on a 
pure piece of open ground (prepared for a rite) and after haring 
set on fire fuel-sticks coming from the udumbara-tree, one must 
pour ghee into the fire. 

4. The large sacrificial ladle (sruc-). the small sacrificial ladle (sruva-) 
and the drinking-vessel (comma-), they all must be made of wood 
coining from the udumbara-tree. After pouring out a thousand 
oblations (the person concerned) becomes possessed of his wish. 

5. One should consider this rite as infallible; it yields success, and 
even if it is (with regard to complete success) vain, it gives the half 
of the fruit to the (person performing it). 

13. 1. Let the man who wishes food offer ghee on a cross-wav, facing the 

sun; let (the man) who wishes wealth feed brahmans a thousand 
times. 

2. Let (the man) who wishes cattle mutter in the cow-pen or pour 
(oblations) into the fire after fasting, haring restrained himself in 

Subandhu swooned and fell lifeless; his brothers, the other Gaupayana s for 
bringing back his soul had recourse to this sukta, The first stanza of this 
sukta (to which Grassmann (Rig-Veda iibersetzt, Leipzig 18/6, II, p. 343) 
has given the title „An den Grist eines im Sterben liegenden Kranken”) reads 
like this : “Your spirit which has gone far away, to Y r ama, the son of Vivas vat 
(who rules over the dead), we bring back to you, to dwell here and to live”, 
and the second half of the stanza recurs as a refrain in the following verses. 
— “The sukta of Sindhudvlpa” : RV. 10, 9; see above, note on III, 4, 3. 

12 2. “This thus” : RV. 10, 61, addressed to the All-gods and sahasrastnii- “winning 

a thousand”. After the seer who proclaimed it it is also designated as Xa- 
bhanedistha. The AitBr. 5, 14, which relates an aetiological myth (Xabhane- 
distha Manava, being deprived by his brothers of any share in his father’s 
property, made them recite RV. 10, 61 and 62, when on the sixth day of a 
sacrifice for gaining the heaven, they became confused ; in exchange for them 
they gave him the thousand which was the gift at the sacrifice), says that 
this text is a sacred formula to win a thousand. Cf. Taitt. S. 3, 1, 9, 4. — 
According to PB. 20. 9, 2 the Nabhanedistha-sukta is seed ; cf. AitBr. 5, 15, 
3. Compare also (ymkhQS. 16, 11, 28 f. 

5. Cf. I, 15, 5 ; III, 15, 5. 



77 


accordance with this direction: then he acquires a thousand head 
of cattle. 

3. Let him have a jewel made consisting of three strings, (one of) 
iron, (one of) copper, and (one of) gold. And upon this the refuse 
matter (ashes) of a thousand fuel-sticks should be poured. 

4. After having made (performed the rite of) the 'refuse of a thousand" 
one should bear that on the head or in the hand, being always pure : 
then one will have a thousand servants. — 

5. (The sukta beginning with) “from afar” is designed to be a cere- 
mony for blessing intended for a snataka; (the man) who wishes 
to obtain heaven shall regularly mutter it, firm in his vow. 

1. One must regularly mutter the praise of 'knowledge" (beginning 
with) "O Brhaspati the first” : then one becomes possessed of know- 
ledge (and) splendid, and one obtains endless bliss. — 

2. In order to destroy bad luck a twice-born man must become a 
drinker of milk (only). When he mutters the (stanza) "the fair- 
winged birds” he obtains bliss. 


3. A mani (translated by “jewel”) is remarkable for its rarity, supernatural 
power, or intrinsic sacral worth. Cf. Weber, Omina und Portenta, p. 377. 

5. RV. 10, 63; according to the Anukr. st. 1-14 and 17 are directed to the 
Visve devah (see also Qahkh.^S. 10, 4, 14; Asv.QS. 7, 7, 2; AitBr. 5, 2), st. 15 
and 16 are in praise of Pathyd svasiih i.e. the goddess of welfare on the way 
(see, however, also Macdonell, on BD. 7, 105). As the Maruts are mentioned 
in st. 15 BD. 7, 105 will be right in stating that st, 16 only refers to that 
goddess. This sukta, in which the word svasti repeatedly occurs, asks the gods 
for protection, for deliverance from sins, from the evil plotter, sickness etc.; 
it refers to the celestial abodes; st. 4; 5; cf. 17. — Snataka -: a young 
brahman who, after performing the lustrations required on his finishing his 
'studentship' in the family and under the guidance of a teacher, returns home 
and is qualified for founding a family. 

1. “O Brhaspati”: RV. 10, 71, the divinity of which is jiidnam "knowledge” 
(Anukr.) : "That knowledge which is immortal light and by union with which 
one attains to brahman, Brhaspati (who is held to be the seer) praised with 
RV- 10, 71” (BD. 7, 109). See also BD. 7, 110 ft., where it is stated that 
‘knowledge” means "correct knowledge of the essential meaning of the Veda” 
and the use of (these) mantras for the sake of livelihood is forbidden. The 
sukta emphasizes the power of speech. Cf., moreover, AitAr. 1, 3, 3. 

2. Bad luck: cf. RV. 10, 71, 2 "good fortune, happiness (laksml) is placed on 
their v/ord ” Instead of “twice-born man” BDEF have "one”. "The fair-winged 
birds”: RV. 10, 73, 11 The sukta is addressed to Indra, and this last stanza 
of it ("The f.b. have approached Indra, the Priyamedhas, the seers, seeking 
help; unveil the darkness, grant (us) abundant eyesight; release us who are 
bound as it were with a net”) it discussed in the AitBr. (3, 19, 14 ft.) : the 
darkness by which the person applying the stanza believes himself surrounded, 
will leave him ; if he rubs his eyes while muttering "grant etc.” he becomes 
possessed of sight until old age, etc. See also SVidh. 1, 7, 13. 



78 


3. But he who, being wrapped in mental darkness, regards his person 
to be in the Self, is, even if he is subject to ill-luck, freed (from it) 
by muttering this (stanza). 

4. When rising early in the morning he shall always wipe off his eyes 
with this (stanza) : then he will become (a person) who sees well 
(and) splendid, and he will ward off ill-luck. — 

5. A twice-born man who, (being) concentrated, mutters the (stanza 
beginning with) “not him you know” loses all dirt (sin) and attains 
the eternal brahma. 

6. (The man) who after having bathed at the days of the changes of 
the moon with this (stanza) offers water with sesamum to Yama 
and the godheads who follow him, is not exposed to dangers 
(coming) from them. — 

7. One shall always mutter these two (suktas) which kill rivals (to wit 
the one beginning with) “who you, 0 Manyu” (and the following), 
and with them (i.e. whilst muttering them) wear a jewel of iron 
(or: a metallic jewel) upon which an oblation of ghee has been 
poured out 

15. 1. (and also) offer a pointed peg of iron with the same two (sfiktas) 

3. The text has: tamasa pravrto yas tu manyeta , cf. AitBr. 3, 19, 14 yma 
tamasa pravrto manyeta. Cf. also AthV. 10, 1, 30. — Self, etc. : cf. Ill, 35, 2. 
One is to recognize one’s identity with the (Supreme) Self or Soul ; cf. such 
texts as Isa Upanisad 6; Manu 12, 91; 125. 

5. The text refers to RV. 10, 82, 7, which, forming part of a sukta addressed 
to Visvakarman (the All-maker, who, in the Vedic literature, acts as a creator 
of all things and architect of the universe and who is represented as an all- 
seing god and universal father by the authors of this sukta and 10, 81), states 
that (ordinary) men, enveloped in darkness and chattering, do not know the 
creator of the world. But the man who really knows that his atman is brah- 
man, is brahman; this implication (cf. Nirukta 14, 10) explains III, 14, 5 d. 
- Cf. IV, 4, 5. 

6. Cf. Ill, 7, 5. 

7. The text refers to RV. 10, 83 and 84, which, with a few variants, are AthV. 
4, 32 and 31. These suktas are prescribed together in KausS. 14, 26 ff. in the 
ceremonies for success in battle and for determining which of two opposing 
armies will gain the victory (see Caland, Zauberritual, p. 29 f.) — AthVPar. 
32, 13 the two hymns are classed in a group of texts which can be used to 
ensure invincibility ( apardjitagana ) ; 20, 4, 1 we find them, together with AV. 
19, 41 (for welfare, strength etc.); 4, 2, 7 (to the unknown god); 5, 3 (for 
protection, “which thee O Agni, may we conquer”); 6, 114 (against disability 
and offence against the gods), used to accompany oblations offered to Skanda, 
the general of the army of the gods against their enemies (see e.g., E. W. 
Hopkins, Epic Mythology, Strassburg 1915, p. 229 f.), — Like the ancient 
Romans, the Indians worked up iron (see also III, 17, 3), which was thought 
to ward off evil spirits (ERE, III, 443; 464; Hdwtb. deutsch, Abergl. II, 717), 

' into amulets. 



79 


at the fourteenth day of a lunar fortnight in a well-kindled fire of 
khadira-wood : (then) one wards off one’s rivals. 

2. Like the highest brahma, the mysterious, the pure, the wonderful, 
so is the charming propitiatory rite: there does not exist anything 
that is higher than it. 

3. Having fasted for twelve days and muttering always (the suktas 
of) this rsi, one must be well-prepared, turning one’s mind upon 
that (i.e. the contents of the texts and the performances connected 
with them), and go to water thrice a day. 

4. At the end of the period of twelve days one should, on a pure spot, 
and concentrated, make the image of a man, made of (in the) sand 
on the ground. 

5. Having trod upon (the spot of) the heart of this (image) one should 
mutter (the suktas of) the rsi : (then) one will know an efficacious 
rite after twenty-four hours. 

1. After (a period of) three days one will vanquish (in a game, a 
lawsuit, gambling etc.) a rich vaisya, after four days a ksatriya, a 
king after five, after six a brahman, 

2. an ascetic after a week, and one will use (this person’s) services. Or 
one must also, after having fasted and bathed mutter this, always 
standing, 

3. if one wishes to take hold of him for oneself. One must avoid an 
inferior person. One must pour out flour (powder) of bilvas offered 
with (poured over with) ‘the refuse matter of a thousand’ 

4. into (his) well in order to bring (a person) into subjection: (then) 
one will quickly subdue that person. To one’s mother, to oneself, 
to one’s sons, and to one’s father, brother(s), friend(s) 

5. one shall direct this subjecting mantra (hrdyam ); one shall carry 
(a lump of) sugar on the head. After having embraced a good friend 
and kissed one’s son on the head, 

2. Cf. Ill, 25, 6; IV, 27, 5. 

3. In the Mss. A n BDF the subject is munih “an (inspired) sage”. 

4. An image of dust or sand etc. : see, e.g., SVidh. 2, 5 and, further, such texts 
as AthVPar. 31, 9, 4. See Henry, M., Index, s.v. effigie. — Cf. I, 5 1; 11, 3. 

5. Cf. I, 15, 5; III, 12, 5. 

1. A vaisya is a man of the third class (agriculturist, etc.), a ksatriya a member 
of the reigning or military groups. — Cf. also SVidh. 2, 5, 5 f. 

2. Always standing : there are other readings : “concentrated”, and “always the 
brahman”. — Hdwtb deutsch. Abergl. I, s.v. Brunnen dwells upon the habit 
of throwing objects in a well for magical purposes. 

5. Kiss the son: See E. W. Hopkins, The sniff-kiss in ancient India, JAOS. 28, 
p. 120 ft. The sniff-kiss was the only kind of kiss recognized till the end of 



80 


17. 1. one must apply this subjecting mantra in order to obtain peace 

(santi) and ease. When the propitiator)' rite is not thoroughly 
accomplished (does not succeed) one shall, after setting on fire the 
image made of sand (dust) on the way, 

2. worship the fire with ghee, if (the rite concerns) a brahman; with 
sesam-oil (if it concerns) a ksatriya, with mustard-oil (if it concerns) 
vaisyas. 

3. One must place an image made of iron in the fire ; and considering 
that as catching fire one must, absorbed in mind by it and pure, 
offer it. 

4. With an awe-inspiring mind one must beat (it) and, being angry, 
one must pour out ghee. According as the blazing image is offered 
in the fire which flames up, 

5. in the same way the brahman will come into his power. One shall 
make a sacrificial bed without distinctive marks from dust (of 
objects which have been) burnt on a cemetery, 

18. 1. (Then) one shall put an image of copper in a blazing (fire made of) 

fuel coming from the vibhitaka-tree ; when midnight is there, 
sesam-oil (and) mustard-oil, accompanied by salt. 

2. There one shall make a sacrificial couch, consisting of reeds (and 
lying) ‘against the grain’ (in reversed order), and sitting on three 
stakes one shall offer with a fierce appearance, 

3. (and) with dishevelled hair when one is aiming at (a person’s) 
death: in a short time one will render (the person concerned) 
willing to comply. Or one should apply the following magical 
method: one must offer blood of one’s own. 

4. Then one brings into subjection a king, a country, a fortified town 
without delay. A rite for (the attainment of) prosperity, (as) taught 
by the hrdyaui, must also be performed by (a person) who controls 
his soul and spirit. 

5. A brahman must perform nothing connected with killing with regard 
to a sinless (person). One must procure a mess of sacrificial food 
with milk of a cow which has a calf of the same outward appearance 

the Vedic age; after the real kiss had become popular, it remained in use, but 
pre-eminently as a token of family love and chaste affection. The term hrdya- 
is applied to a Vedic mantra used to effect the subjection of a rival or enemy; 
the original meaning of lirdya- is “being in the heart, beloved, dear”. Schcftc- 
lowitz (o c. p. 102) translates hrdyasfikia- by “Freundschaftslied”. — “Sugar” 

( gudam ) has been surmised by Meyer; the Mss. read gurum "spiritual 
teacher”, or ta tam (“him”). 

18. 5. Cl. II, 16, 3. 



81 


1. after having poured it over with the refuse matter of a thousand’; 
(then) he must cause a first-born calf to drink: that calf will have 
a thousand companions, and be free from diseases. 

2. And he should also cause cows to drink : they will also be free from 
diseases. And he should continually feed sons as well as friends 
and other good people. 

3. They will also be healthy and affectionate, (and) free from distress. 
— If one puts one’s mind upon a woman: (this is) a mighty means 
to win her : 

4. Being in good condition, one shall boil, by means of fire, grains of 
rice which has been broken by the nails, pulverized into small parts, 
(and) poured over with the ‘refuse matter of a thousand’. 

5. With it one shall make an image whilst thinking in one’s mind of 
that woman. After having anointed it with sesam-oil one shall cast 
it, member by member, into the fire. 

1. One shall first tear off the feet, and saying phat put them on the 
fire; then (the underparts of) the legs, the knees, the thighs, the 
arms, and then the head. 

2. After having cut off the region of the heart one must put it on his 
own heart, and (while doing so) a brahman (must) mutter (the text 
of) this rsi : (thus) that woman comes into (his) power. 

3. A brahman should perform this (rite) by no means with regard to 
married (women), nor with regard to faithful (women) nor with 
respect to (women) of a virtuous and religious character. 

4. He who would treat married (women) belonging to a low class 
according to his wish, should first submit her (sic!) husband, and 
afterwards he should place (the image of) that woman (on the fire) 

4 ff. Compare especially SVidh. 2, 5, 4. 

1. Phat , originally an onomatopoeia, imitative of the sound of breaking, cracking, 
or noisely bursting, etc. (cf. VajSamh. 7, 3 bhahgena hato ’sau phat), also used 
in magic formulas (KausS. 116, 7 in a rite against ants of abnormal 
appearance : one has to offer whilst pronouncing these words “ . . .Indra shall 
break the eggs of you all . . ., ‘phat 7 the ants are killed”). Thus the syllable 
appears to have assumed a magical value and to have been put into use in 
incantations : in the description of a varma (“defensive armour, coat of mail, 
shelter; preservation formula”) applied by Indra to conquer his enemies 
(BhagPur. 6, 8, 8) phat is added to the words Om Visnave namah (“Om, 
adoration to Visnu”) and directed to all the quarters of the sky. In the 
commentary on AthV. 4, 18, 3 phat is equalized with himsanam “the act of 
hurting, injuring 77 . Cf. TAr. 4, 27. For such syllables see also Uddharakosah 
by Daksinamurti, ed. by Raghu Vira and Shodo Taki, Lahore 1938. 

4. This verse does not contradict st. 3, as is Meyer's opinion (p. VII), but deals 
with an exception. 


6 



82 


5. after having eaten rice boiled in milk and spat it out immediately. 
That powder is to be given to a wicked wife (?) and traditionally 
held to be a means to fetter her heart. 

21. 1. One may charm an odd number of fruits of large trees in the same 

way. Of them one should enjoy the paired ones oneself, one should 
leave the(m that form a) half (pair). 

2. One must give them (to him), whom one wishes to subdue, while 
muttering (the text of) the sage. (With regard to a person) of whom 
one, after having been a friend of his, has (become) an enemy, 
every single suitable means of propitiating handed down 

3. must be performed and further the mantra(s) to be used to effect 
the subjection of an enemy (hrdyam) and so on. If anybody 
performs suitable rites according to his wish, — 

4. the wise men consider that which has been declared by the hrdyam 
to be the direction (given) by Parakadasa. And this means of 
winning women is also destined (to be a means of winning) men, 

5. Wicked wife : the text has krsnajayayai . 

21 1. Most Mss. give “dry up” instead of “leave”. 

2. After RV. 10, 84 two suktas are inserted in the Kashmir collection of the 
Rgveda. The first of them is referred to as Jirdyasuktam (see note on III, 18, 
4), and thus described in the accompanying Anukramani (index giving the 
name of the seer, the deity addressed to etc.) . . . prajapatyo hrdyo , vaisvadcvam 
in , vivdJidriJiasis tu etc;, i.e. “...a marriage-prayer”. Although various divi- 
nities are mentioned and addressed in this sukta and also BD. 7, 118 considers 
it as a praise of all the dwellers in the celestial regions, adding that it consists 
for the most part of benedictions, it is essentially a sctmvananam (this very 
term occurs in st. 8; of RVidh. Ill, 21, 2; 4), i.e. a spell of incantation 
intended to cause mutual fondness or sympathy, to win and fascinate a woman 
or other people and so on. The first stanza is, in several grhysutras, used at 
marriage and upanayana (the initiation of a student) ceremonies: “I place 
your heart in my will, let your mind (thought, intentions) follow my mind 
(etc.); rejoice in my words devoted to me only, let Brhaspati join you to me” 
(see e.g. M. J._Dre$den, Manavagrhyasutra, Thesis Utrecht 1941, p. 49 and 98; 
according to AsvGS. 1, 21, 7 and farikhGS. the spiritual teacher pronounces 
this stanza, when the student \brahmacdrm-) is conducted to him). See Schefte- 
lowitz, o.c., p. 100 ff. ; Rgveda edited by Sontakke and Kashikar, IV, p. 949 ff . 

4. “(The s'ukta of) Parakadasa” is the second of the two khilas (see note on I, 
20, 3) which in the Kashmir collection of the RV. come between 10, 84 and 85. 
It is designated by the name of the reputed rsi, is addressed to Agni and 
consists of 8 stanzas. See khila 3, 16, Scheftelowitz, o.c., p. 103; Rgveda 
edited by Sontakke and Kashikar, IV, p. 951; BD. 7, 118. In the sukta the 
god is asked to “thrust up” the person towards whom the incantation is 
directed (cf. also AthV. 3, 25, 1), to destro}' by drying up the envious enemies 
of the person speaking, to fix his arrows in their mortal spots, etc., and he 
is said to torment a woman by heat. “Dieses Lied bewirkt also die Aussoh- 
nung mit Frau und Kindern Oder mit Verwandten, mit denen man in Streit 
gelebt hat” (Scheftelowitz, l.c.)* 



83 


5. and also an enemy of kinsmen, and always (a text causing) victory 
in the battle. One shall have a spike made of wood of the khadira 
tree and fix it in the heart, 

1. after one has previously made an image by means of sand or by 
means of husks. And after one has also consecrated an arrow one 
must arrange an hostile encounter. 

2. One shall consider this, when employed, invincible, a killer of foes, 
parakadasa (by name), aiming at enemies, a (magical formula of 
the) hrdayam (-denomination), handed down as a means of subduing 
(or propitiating other people). 

3. Even by pondering over these two suktas in one’s mind one controls 
(brings near) success. — A father shall cause a girl to hear the 
evolutional section belonging to Surya : 

4. by that she obtains a worthy and similar husband. The girl, while 
touching her navel constantly, must mutter (the stanza beginning 
with) “her here”. 


5. “KhacHra wood” (see above, II, 7, 1): cf. st. 8 of the above sukta: 
khadiram hrdi sankfm no dvisato na vivesaya. — As to the rite compare 
also SVidh.* 3, 6, 10 ft. 

3. Cf. IV, 14, 5. — “Surya”: The next quotations are from the well-known 
Surya-sukta (RV. 10, 85) which, describing the wedding of the daughter of 
the Sun and Soma, and consisting of 47 stanzas addressed to various divinities, 
is also enclosed in the two ‘hymns' of the nuptial (14th) book of the AthV. 
A large part of the stanzas of AV. 14 are used in the sections 75-79 of 
KausS. which deal with marriage ceremonies, and a number of them are 
also prescribed by the grhyasutras when treating this subject. See Hillebrandt, 
Rituall., p. 63 ft.; Keith, RPh., p. 373 ft.; M. Winternitz, Das altindische 
Hochzeitsrituell . . ., Denkschr. Akad. d. Wiss. Wien, 40 (1892) ; the same, 
the Mantra-patha or the Prayer Book of the Apastambins, Anecdota 
Oxoniensia 1897, to which Dresden's Manavagrhyasutra (see above) may now 
serve as a supplement. The sukta is discussed at length in the BD.: 7, 119- 
140. For Surya see Macdonell, VM., p. 184. — ‘Evolutional section' or 
‘evolution' : bhdvazsrttcm : RV. 10, 85, 6-13. This term also occurs BD. 7, 
123 and 135. “This was . . . probably a regular designation of these eight 
stanzas in the Brahmana style" (Macdonell, BD., p. 283; see also Meyer, 
p. XI and XXVIII): the 3rd quarter of st. 3 is identical with BD. 7, 123 c: 
suryayai (which probably, in the brahmana way = siiryayah). The stanzas 
85, 6-13 mainly deal with the entities serving as requisites for Surya’s 
wedding (“Intention was the pillow, sight was the ointment..., when S. 
went to her husband”) and with the divinities performing a function (“the 
Asvins were the wooers , . .”). 

4. * Her here”: RV. 10, 85, 45, which is according to the Anukr. addressed to 
Surya herself, but according to BD. 7, 137 to Indra (see Macdonell, BD., 
II, p. 287). The stanza reads like this: “Grant her here, O Indra, many 
children and good fortune, give her ten sons and make 'her husband the 
eleventh”. 



84 


5. The husband shall mutter in the same way: hence they both (will 
be) long-lived. A brother or also a father shall cause a girl to bathe 
with (stanzas, or requisites?) appropriate (to the occasion). 

23. 1* (Then) she will have ten sons and she will not be deprived of her 

husband. Constantly touching the girl on the head one shall mutter 
(the stanza beginning with) “supreme in rank” : 

2. (Then) she is revered by her mother-in-law, father-in-law, the 
brother(s) of her husband, or also by her husband's sister. During 
the bathing one shall use the sukta in which Indram carries on a 
dispute. 

3. It is concerned with the nine chiefs of a class' (and) gives happiness 
for the husband, and sons. On (a spot) provided with a multitude of 
aquatic flowers and filled with bright-coloured water-jars 

4. there must in like manner be made a sacrifice to Soma, the Gan- 
dharvas and Agni and also to Bhaga and the Apsaras, and to the 
Lord of the Yaksas, 

23 1. RV. 10, 85, 46, addressed to Surya (Anukr.) and reading like this : “Be 

supreme in rank over the (your) father-in-law, over your mother-in-law, 
over your husband’s sister, over your husband’s brothers”. 

2. The text refers to RV. 10, 86 which contains a dispute between Indra and 
his wife Indram about and in the presence of the monkey Vrsakapi, who is 
Indra’s favourite and has damaged Indrani’s property. In spite of the sug- 
gestions of some scholars (see, e.g., Keith, RPh. p. 133; A. Hillebrandt, 
Vedische Mythologie, II, Breslau 1929, p 249) this sukta must be considered 
as obscure. The sukta contains sexual digressions which will have made 
it fit to be used in this connection. The ritual use (AsvQrS. 8, 3, 4; Sankh.£S. 
12, 6, 13; 8, 2; 13, 1 mention it in connection with the Dvadasaha) points 
the same way. — I do not adopt Meyer’s conjecture Indranyah for Indranyu 
(Mss.). 

3. Chiefs of a class* names of those zodiacal signs which in a particular 
grouping are the first. See the passages in Var, BS. meant in Pet. Diet. VI, 
731 and A. Weber, Indische Studien, II, 281 if. — Water-jars etc.: see 
F. D. K Bo^ch, De gouden kiem. Inleiding in de Indische symboliek, Am- 
sterdam 1948, p. 121 ff. “Granting happiness (conjugal felicity etc.) . . : cf. 
the sexual stanzas 6 f., and 16 f., and also 11 “Indram (.= Indra’s wife)’s 
husband will not die of old age”; st. 15. — “Sons”: cf. st. 13 and 23. 

4f. Soma (see also above, II, 35, 5), who is also a bestower of wealth etc., is 
also a divinity of fertility and vegetation. The gandharvas are often associated 
with him (see e.g. Macdonell, VM., p. 136). Agni, who, in general, is a 
benefactor, is repeatedly invoked to grant: deliverance from childlessness, 
prosperity, domestic welfare and other boons. Here they are propitiated 
together because the unmarried young woman was regarded as belonging 
to them. See, e.g?., J. J. Meyer, Sexual life in ancient India, London 1930, 
p. 561 ; the same, Trilogie altind. Machte u. Feste d. Vegetation, Zurich 1937, 
p. 179. — Bhaga (see II, 13, 7), presides over marriage and bestows wealth. 

Apsaras (see I, 5, 3) are, like the Gandharvas, also concerned with 
fertility (“Fruchtbarkeitsgeister, also erotische Genien”, Meyer, Trilogie, I, 



85 


5. to Indrani, the Wives of the gods and to Rati and Pradyumna. 
After having offered in the fire (oblations) which are richly 
furnished with the water of a river and which are filled up with 
the five products of the cow 

1. one must cause a girl to bathe while she is on a spot in the South, 
after having poured over (her) hair, which (first) has been rubbed 
over with a decoction of priyahgus, Indian fig-trees and nagas, 

2. with leavings (refuse matter) and filled it up with all kinds of 
medicinal herbs. After having charmed it at the end of the sukta 
with the nine (stanzas beginning with) “away, indeed”, 

3. one shall sprinkle her, after she has fasted, with an abundance of 
water (which has been) placed in a jar. The bodies (persons) of the 
woman which may kill (hurt) her husband are allayed by that (rite). 

4. One may cause (women) to bathe (whilst reciting) the “(verses) of 
a lascivious character” : (then) one will know which woman (which 
of one’s wives) consorts with two men (another man). Besides, one 
must select from the sukta this pair of verses (characterized by the 
words) “He is not powerful” : 

p. 34); they are the divinities of love-lorn women. Gandharvas and apsaras 
are invoked by persons desiring offspring. — Kubera, the overlord of yaksas 
(divinities connected with vegetation, fertility, and generally regarded as 
benevolent and inoffensive) is, though mainly worshipped for wealth and 
propert>% also a deity presiding over or connected with fecundation. — 
Indrani: Indra’s wife. — “Wives of the gods”: the wives of the gods, see 
£Br. 1, 9, 2, 11. — Rati: “sexual pleasure”, an apsaras, wife of Kama, the 
god of love. — Pradyumna : a son of Krsna and RukminI, who was regarded 
as a reincarnation or resuscitation of Kama; thus, P. is a name of the god 
of love, whom the Apsaras and Gandharvas recognized as their lord. 

5. Five . . . : see II, 10, 1. 

1. Priyahgu : a fragrant and medicinal plant, from which perfumes are made 
and which is regarded as auspicious (Var. BS. 55, 3) and often used in 
religious ceremonies. Var. BS. 77, 30 it is an ingredient of a perfume for 
the hair ( kesaragandha -). — Indian fig-tree: vata~ (banyan, Ficus indica). 
— Naga is the name of various plants ; here the Mesua Roxburghii is 
intended which is (e.g. Var. BS. 77, 13) used in preparing perfumes. 

2. Nine (stanzas) : R.V. 10, 86, 1-9. 

3. Read tanvah : compare especially ParGS. 1, 11, 2 yasyai patighni tanus tarn 
asyai nasaya etc. “if this woman has a body which might kill (hurt) her 
husband destroy that . . 

4. Ahmiasydh (sc. rcah ) “(verses) of a lascivious character” ; RV. Khila, 5, 22 
= AthV. 20, 136, 1-4, 9, 5, 6, 10, 11, 15 (see Scheftelowitz o c., p 165 ff. ; 
Rgveda ed. by Sontakke and Kashikar IV, p. 1000 f .). GankhQrS. 4 states 
that during the Asvamedha (horse-sacrifice) the priests pronounced this 
text at the moment of the first queen’s lying down near the horse and her 
uniting with it (cf. also 12, 24). As the relation of the queen and the horse 
is in all probability a fertility rite and obscene language is often regarded 



86 


5. This is prescribed by some (experts) in connection with the manly 
act of man. — One shall mutter the (sukta beginning with) “demon- 
slaying, impetuous” as a means of destroying demons. 

25. 1. After having kindled fire with that (sukta) one shall constantly 

worship and offer oblations consisting of clarified butter: by that 
one repels the evil demons (; raksas ). 

2. This is a destroyer of evil demons; it is said to be the highest 
expiatory text for averting evil. — One must here apply the sukta 
(characterized by) “the oblation, the drink”. 

3. One shall concentrate ones attention upon the (sukta) “the oblation, 
the drink” in connection with the impurity of forbidden food. One 
shall perpetually meditate on this eminent means of purification 

4. after having fixed the eye upon the sun; one shall, self-governed, 
concentrate one's attention for six months: then one will see the 
way which leads to the gods in the orb of the sun. 

5. And for (the man who does so) the universal knowledge' becomes 
manifest as dwelling in his own body. By concentrating one's attent- 
ion upon the (sukta characterized by) “the oblation, the drink” one 
gets rid of all sins. — 

as conducive to fecundity (Gonda, Drama, p. 351 ff.), and as AitBr. 6, 36, 5 
after “he recites the Ahanasyah (stanzas)” states : “from this organ seed is 
poured, from seed offspring are born; verily thus he secures propagation”, 
these stanzas will be prescribed in RVidh. for the sake of fruitfulness. — 
I do not hold Meyer’s opinion (p. XVII) to be right (“praeceptum illud 
nuptiale snapaycd ah. antiquatur corollario upoddJt . cnam — dv. f victrice ckcsam 
sententia”). — Instead of “consorts with etc.” the Mss. DE give “disagree”. 
— “He is not powerful”: RV. 10, 86, 16 and 17 discussing the question 
whether the man whose membrum hangs down between his thighs is 
powerful, or the man, whose membrum becomes erect when he sits down. 
£ankh£S. 16, 13, 10 reckons st. 17 to a series of ‘insulting stanzas’. 

5. The demon-slaying sukta, addressed to Agni the goblin-slayer, is RV. 10, 87. 
When kindled, Agni consumes with iron teeth the sorcerers (st. 2), takes 
hold of the false worshippers with his tongue (st. 2), defends the sacrifice 
with sharp eye (st. 9), is harmful and gleaming against the demons (st. 9), 
crushes them away with his flames (st. 13), etc. See for this function of 
fire Macdonell, VM., p. 95. The first 23 stanzas are (in slightly different 
order) identical with AV. 8, 3. Part of them are used in various expiatory 
rites: see Whitney-Lanman, AV., p. 481. These are reckoned to the class of 
catcmasuktas (suktas for exorcising demons): AthVPar. 32, 3 and KausS. 8, 
25; AthVPar. 32, 14 reckons them to the class of samtavanna texts which 
promote protection; see also ibid. 33, 7, 3 where it is said to be a 
sarwavarma and to safeguard the snataka against danger of demons. 

25. 2-5. “The oblation . . : the text refers to RV 10, 88, addressed to the three 
Agnis (the terrestrial, the middle and the celestial, BD. 7, 142) or, as the 
Anukr. has it, Surya and Vaisvanara (= Agni). Some dharma-texts prescribe 
this text to free the violator of a guru’s bed from sin (VasDh£. 26, 7; 



87 


6. One shall mutter the sukta “I will praise Indra ,J as a means of 
destroying enemies. It is the most excellent means of purification, 
a secret (and) supernormal device for being freed from impurity. 

L In the light half of the month, on a fortunate day of the week, 
under an auspicious naksatra, under a good position of the planets, 
on the twelfth day (of the fortnight) one shall prepare an oblation 
(of rice etc. : earn) dedicated to Visnu for a person desirous of a son. 

2. On the eleventh the married couple shall fast in a temple, after 
having honoured Janardana in the right way with (the next) sixteen 
stanzas from the Rgveda. 

3. One must have an oblation (of rice etc.: earn ) boiled with the 
Purusasukta when one is prompted by the wish for sons. Then one 
will soon obtain a son who is devoted to Visnu and able to (beget) 
offspring. 

Manu 11, 251). — “Way of the gods”: The very* difficult st. 15 speaks of 
two ways, distinguishing between the way of the gods and that of mortal 
men; “by these (ways) all that moves (lives) on earth approaches .. This 
stanza is quoted in one of the well-known passages on transmigration in 
BrhArUp. 6, 2, 2 “ ... do you know the access of the path leading to the 
gods (devayanay), or of the one leading to the fathers (pitryana-) by doing 
what people go to the path of the gods or of the fathers?” See, e.g., Rodhe, 

o. c., p. 110, and n. 16: In the RV. dcz’ayana- “leading to the gods” usually 
refers to the path by which the gods came for the sacrifice (or by which 
they returned to heaven), but in the early speculations about a cycle of 
existence, or existence after death the term applies to the path by which 
the soul goes to the gods or to the absolute. — The use of this sukta in 
connection with forbidden food seems to proceed from its referring to 
oblations (st. 1), a convivial party (st. 17) etc. — “Knowledge” ( vidya ) not 
only includes learning (first of all the Veda), but also wisdom, mystical and 
magical knowledge and even magical skill. Compare, e.g., also P. V. Kane. 
History' of Dharmasastra II, 1 (Poona 1941), p. 106 n. ; 354 f. A vidya 
concerning the “universal” {vaxsvanara-') atman is mentioned ChUp. 5, 11. 

6. “I will praise Indra” : RV. 10, S9. addressed to Indra. C£. especially st. 6 ff., 
in which the author dwells upon Indra as destroying Vrtra and wickedness 
and as punishing criminals and enemies. — Cf. Ill, 1, 1 and 15, 2. 

1-2. “Position”: the term gocara- applies to the position of the planets at the 
time of observation ; see VarBS. ch. 104, translated by H. Kern, The Brhat- 
Samnita of Varahamihira, in: Verspreide Geschriften, II, The Hague 1913, 

p. 142. — “Temple” : like other religious observances described in this text, 
Hinduism and its institutions are unequivocally referred to. — Janardana: 
Visnu. — Sixteen: RV. 10, 90, consisting of 16 stanzas. 

3. Purusasukta: the well-known text RV. 10, 90 which describes the gods as 
the agents of creation, while the material out of which the world is made 
is the body of Purusa, who. being thousand-headed and covering the earth 
on all sides, is all this, that has been and that will be, the lord of ‘immor- 
tality'. As this sukta deals with creation and contains many forms of the 
verb jmz- “to be bom”, it appears to have been regarded as a means of 
bringing about the birth of a son. — In post-Vedic times Purusa as “Soul” 



88 


4. Twelve twelfth days (of the half month) one shall in the right way 
scatter (offer) the caru with milk. (To the share of him) who does 
(so) a thousand will fall ; he goes to the highest place of Visnu. 

5. After having sacrificed in the fire, according to the direction and 
in the correct manner, with (these) sixteen (stanzas) the twice-born 
man shall, joining the hollowed hands in reverence, with these (very 
stanzas) pronounce the praise. 

27. 1. (He shall praise) Kesava in (the month of) Margasirsa, in Pausa 

(the manifestation of the God) which goes by the name of Narayana, 
Madhava in the month of Magha, and Govinda in Phalguna, 

2. and so also in Caitra Visnu, in Vaisakha Madhusudana, in Jyestha 
one should know Trivikrama (to be adored), in Asadha (they know) 
Vamana (to be revered), 

3. in Sravana one should know Srldhara (to be adored), in the (month) 
after that Hrsikesa, in Asvina Padmanabha and Damodara in 
Karttika. 

4. These twelve names were divulged by the sage Rsyasriiga. One shall 
revere (the god) with the names of the months: (then) one will 
acquire all the objects of one's desires, 

or “Supreme Being:” is found as a title or manifestation of Visnu; and 
Purusa Narayana already occurs £B. 12, 3, 4 ; 13, 6, 1 ; see also R. G. 
Bhandarkar, Vaisnavism, £aivism e tc., Strassburg 1913, p. 31. Narayana 
(who, in post-Vedic texts, = Visnu) is represented as the seer of RV. 10, 90, 
but this only points to a connection between N. and the deity of the sukta. 
— The text is used in various rites: see, e.g., AthVPar. 10, 1, 7; 42, 2, 11; 
44, 4, 2; 72, 4, 3; Manu 11, 251; GautDh£. 19, 12 reckons it to the class of 
purificatory texts. 

4. In the oldest texts the third or highest of Visnu's famous three steps is 
beyond the flight of birds or mortal ken; it is his abode where meritorious 
men are said to rejoice with gods. In later texts it is defined as brahma, 
the ‘highest world' etc. 

27. 1-3. A detailed account of the important fast at the worship of Krsna on the 
twelfth day of the twelve months and of the results acquired by it is given 
in the Mbh. 13, a. 109: “The man who fasts on the twelfth day (of the 
moon) in the month Margasirsa and adores (Krsna) as Kesava for the whole 
day and night, acquires (the merits of) the Horse-sacrifice and becomes free 
of his sins, etc. etc.” The order of the names of the god and their relation 
to the months is the same. Stanzas containing the names in this order are 
also found in Var. BS. 105, 14 and 15. See also Weber, Ober die Krsnajan- 
masthaml (Berlin Academy 1867), p. 217 f. 

For the names of the god see e.g, Hopkins, EM,, p. 20 2 ft. — Margasirsa 
is November-December (the first of the two winter-months); in later times 
it is the first month of the year. — The month following after £ravana is 
Bhadrapada or Prausthapada. 

4. Rsyaspnga, a descendant of Kasyapa was, according to the epic tradition, 
a famous hermit, horn of a doe. See H. Liiders, in Nachrichten Gotting. 



89 


5. one will beget a son who will be long-lived, famous, intelligent, rich, 
rich in offspring, who behaves in accordance with the established 
norm, and who is endowed with (the quality of) purity or goodness. 

1. After having sacrificed fuel-sticks coming from the asvattha-tree 
one shall once again sacrifice in the fire, having (first) meditated 
on the abode of the fire and revered Madhusudana. 

2. Then, restraining one's speech and pure, one shall at each verse 
perform a burnt-offering; (further,) with (the whole of) the sukta 
one shall pour out an oblation into the fire at the beginning and the 
end as aforesaid. 

3. As to the rest of the oblation — the woman shall, after having 
adored the Lord Narayana, eat the remnants of the oblation and, 
having received blessings, lie down for the night. 

4. Then, after this ritual act has been performed, the brahmans shall 
be satiated. As long as she is not with child, a second wife shall 
retreat. 

5. A childless woman, or a woman whose children (sons) are dead, 
or who only gives birth to a girl, will soon bring a son into the 
world, as Rsyasrhga has divulged. • — 

1. I shall explain the homage (to be paid) to Visnu of boundless glory, 
by paying which all the sages will attain to the absorption into 
brahman. 

2. In water, in fire, in the heart, in the sun, on a piece of open ground, 
and in idols, in these six the sages traditionally hold the homage 
due to Hari (to take place) in the correct way. 

Gcs d. Wiss. 1897 and 1901 (= Philologica Indica, Gottingen 1940, p. 1 and 
47). He is frequently quoted as a teacher or author on subjects coming 
under the head of dharma (Kane, History of Dharmasastra, I, Poona 1930, 
p. 223), and, according to A. Stenzler (Weber’s Ind. Studien I, p. 233), the 
Padma Pur. regards him as an author of a dharma-book. 

5. But for an inverted order of two words, this stanza is identical with Manu 
3, 263. 

1. The asvattha is the Ficus religiosa : Henry, Magie, p. 275; Macdonell-Keith, 
I, p 43. Madhusudhana : i.e. Visnu-Krsna (“the destroyer of the demon 
Madhu”). 

2. Cf. II, 23, 3. 

4. “Satiated”, litt. “a satiating of the twice-born (brahmans) must take place”: 
a ‘satiating’ ( tarpana -) : refreshing gods, deceased persons etc. by presenting 
to them libations of water etc. 

1. Absorption...: brahmcniirvCwcim; the term also occurs BhagGita 5, 24 and 
literally means: “the nirvana- of (or, rather: that is) brahman-'. Radha- 
krishnan, The Bhagavadgita (London 1948), p. 184 translates: “the beatitude 
of God”. 

2. “Piece of open ground”, levelled, squared and prepared for a sacrifice: 



90 


3. The god is in the fire for those who perform ritual ceremonials, 
the god is in heaven (the sky) for those who are thoughtful (and 
offer prayers), in idols for the weak-minded, for the yogins Hari 
is in the heart. 

4. The waters are his seat: therefore Hari is always in them. And in 
consequence of his omnipresence (he is) in the piece of open ground 
for those whose soul is developed (and purified) by meditating on 
the universal soul. 

5. Everyone who with the Purusasukta offers flowers or water will 
have honoured the whole of this world (including) the movable and 
the immovable. 

6. The deity of this sukta which consists of anustubh-stanzas (but) 
ends in a tristubh is the Purusa, who is the seed of the world; 
Narayana is traditionally held to be the rsi (the sage who divulged 
this text). 

30. 1. Narayana, long-armed one, listen with concentrated mind, O Lord ! 

I will explain the practical rules connected with the Purusasukta 
with regard to the homage (to be paid to Thee), 

2. the kindling of the sacrificial fire (with clarified butter and so on), 
the directions concerning the muttering (of prayers, passages from 
the scriptures, names of the god etc.) and the eulogium which has 
the nature of the real-and-true (sat). — After having bathed in 
accordance with the rule as mentioned before, one shall, facing east 
and pure of mind, 

3. fix the first (stanza) in the left, the second in the right hand; the 
third in the left foot, and the fourth in the right; 

sthandila-. — “Idols’': the word prathna includes “symbols, images, pictures, 
statues” and so on. — Hari : Visnu. 

4. “Seat”: the term ayaianam also denotes “sanctuary”. 

6. Narayana; see above, III, 26, 3. Narayana occurs for the first time in the 
datapaths Brahmana, and in the Taittirlya Aranyaka he is brought into 
relation with Visnu. In the so-called Naravanlya section of the Mahabharata 
(12, a. 334-351), N., the eternal soul of the universe and ultimate resting- 
place of men, is also the origin of the world, and the Supreme God. He is 
identified with Vasudeva With N.-V. Krsna soon becomes identified. The 
cult of Krsna-Vasudeva became the basis of the Bhagavadgita as well as 
of the later Vaisnavism, Krsna being identified with Visnu. See e.g. R. G. 
Bhandarkar, Vaisnavism, £aivism etc., Strassburg 1913 ; Ch. Eliot, Hinduism 
and Buddhism, London 1921 ; S. Radhakrishnan, Indian philosophy (reprinted) 
I, London 1948, p. 489 ff. 

30. 1. Long-armed: mighty persons and beings are supposed to possess great 

physical power. 

3. Fix: by the 'ritual placing or fixing 5 (iiyasa-), a description of which is 
especially found in the so-called Tantric ritual, one devotes oneself, by means 



91 


4. the fifth in the left knee, the sixth one shall fix in the right (knee) ; 
the seventh in the left hip, the eighth in the right hip ; 

5. and the ninth in the navel, the tenth one shall fix in the heart; the 
eleventh in the region of the throat, the twelfth in the left arm ; 

6. the thirteenth in the right arm, and in the mouth the fourteenth; 
and in the eyes the fifteenth, and the sixteenth one shall fix in the 
skull. 

. 1. After having executed, in this way, the direction concerning the 

fixing (nyasa-), one shall subsequently begin the worship ( puja ), — 
having, in accordance with the rule, performed the nyasa, as in the 
body, so also in the god. 

2. Having first performed the fixing of the mantras ( mantranyasam ) 
in one’s own body and in the divinities, one shall, having pronoun- 
ced the gayatri and the syllable Om and having touched one’s limbs 
(in the above-mentioned way), worship the imperishable Visnu. 

3. ‘Breathing out’ and invitation (must take place) through the nose, 
on solid (ground) the sacrificial fire and the homage. As to what 
is not solid it will be optional : both of them may take place on a 
piece of open ground prepared for a sacrifice. 

4. As the ‘breathing out’ and the invocation through the nose are fixed 
(established), so are the invocation and the dismission by means of 
the homage (paid to the) Saligrama. 

of definite acts (the application of powerful formulas to various parts of 
the body etc.), entirely to the object of one’s meditation. According to the 
Tantric texts nyasa is a powerful means of attaining the state of perfect 
absorption (see, e.g., A. Avalon, The Great Liberation, Madras 1927, p. 41). 

6. The verb vinyasyati is also found in Tantric texts in the sense of nyasvati. 
When the mantra is said, it is thought of as being located in the parts of 
the body mentioned. 

1 1. “God” and “body” : the text has yathd dehe tatha devc, i.e. “as in the body, 

so in the god” ; the assonance accentuates the exact correspondence. 

2. Gayatri: the very sacred Savitri stanza (see I, 3, 4) is also called g. — 
Omkara: I, 3, 4. 

3. Passages analogous to these stanzas which describe so-called ‘tantric’ rites 
may be found in A. Avalon’s Tantrik Texts, e.g. vol. 21, London-Calcutta 
1940, p. 199; see also the same, Principles of Tantra, London 1917, passim. 

4. Some illustrations may be found in: W. Kirfel, Hinduismus (in H. Haas, 
Bilderatlas zur Religionsgeschichte) Leipzig, 1934, p. XXXV ff. etc. — 
A saligrama~ or (as the usual form has it) salagrama- is, in post-epic 
religious practices, a sacred stone worshipped by the devotes of Visnuism and 
supposed to be pervaded by the presence of Visnu. The name also applies to 
the god himself as worshipped in such a stone. The stone is black and con- 
tains a fossil ammonite. It is regarded as a purifying power. See e.g. Garuda- 
Pur. 45, and E. Abegg, Der Pretakalpa des Garuda-Purana, Berlin-Leipzig 
1921, p. 109; 126. 



5. As the Holy One, the first being, Hari, is in the sacred stone, so 
is he not elsewhere, in the sun and so on, or even in the Vaikuntha, 
(he the) omnipresent (one). 

6 . With the first stanza one shall invoke the god, the Supreme Spirit. 
With the second one shall give him a seat, water for washing the 
feet with the third. 

7. Arghya-water (offered at the respectful reception of a guest) must 
be given with the fourth, with the fifth water for sipping (from 
the palm of the hand for purification). With the sixth one shall 
perform the bathing (of the idol), and with the seventh (one shall 
give it) clothes. 

8. (one shall give it) the sacred thread with the eight, and with the 
ninth unguent. With the tenth a flower must be given, and with the 
eleventh incense. 

9. With the twelfth one shall present a light (lamp) to it, with the 
thirteenth an offering (of food) ; with the fourteenth adoration, with 
the fifteenth (perform) the ritual circuniambulation. 

10. On the occasion of the bathing, the supplying with clothes, the 
offering of food one should give water for sipping. With the 
sixteenth one shall have the daksina offered to the utmost of one's 
ability. 

1. After having executed a circumambulation one shall, further, 
perform the rite whilst muttering (with a) concentrated (mind). 
Having muttered the sulcta according to one's ability one shall 
present (the sacrificial gifts) to him. 

5. Vaikuntha : Visnu’s heaven or paradise, sometimes described as in the 
Northern Ocean, or as on Mount Meru. In later Vaisnavism it is the ‘highest 
heaven’, the abode of the liberated. 

6. For a similar description of the worship of Visnu see Vaikli. 4, 12, which, 
after presenting a seat etc. etc. to the god, prescribes meditating on him as 
the soul of the sacrifice and praising him with the Purusa-sukta. 

8. Sacred thread : originally put on during the performance of sacred ceremonies, 
then regularly worn (over the left shoulder and hanging down under the 
right) by all twice-born men (the three upper classes). 

9. “Offering”: the word nivcdanam is no doubt used for naivedyam “offering 
of food 'for an idol”, which occurs in III, 31, 10 — Ceremonious circ?um- 
ambulation from left to right (pradaksina- 9 : see W. Caland, Ecn indoger- 
maansch Iustratie-gebruik, Versl. Med. Akad. v. Wet. Amsterdam 1898, 
p. 275 ff. 

10. Compare ViSm. 22, 75 “Having sneezed, slept, eaten, going to eat or to 
study, having drunk (water), bathed, spat, having put on one’s garments . . . 
one must sip water”; cf. the more succinct passage in Manu, 5, 145. — 
After a sacrifice etc. a daksina, an offering to the priest(s), is given by which 
the sacrifice becomes perfect and successful. 



93 


2. At the right side of the god one shall have the hole in the ground 
for the consecrated fire or the piece of open ground prepared with 
the first (turn), with the second the consecration by sprinkling. 

3. With the third one shall add fuel to the fire, with the fourth one 
shall kindle (it). With the fifth the heating of the clarified butter 
(shall take place) and also the boiling of the oblation (of rice etc. : 

cam). 

4. With the sixth one shall arrange a lotus to be a seat in the midst 
of the fire; one shall direct the thoughts towards the lord of the 
chiefs of the gods whose splendour is equal to that of the fire (which 
is to destroy the world) at the end of a period. 

5. Having, further, asked permission to give perfume and flowers, 
(and) to dedicate incense and lights, one shall, thereupon, perform 
the rite with the seventh (and the following stanzas) in due 
succession. 

6. One shall first pour into the fire so many fuel-sticks which have 
been sprinkled. Then one shall sacrifice with ghee (butter which 
has been clarified etc.) and then again with an oblation (cam). 

7. After one has, then, in the said way, sacrificed and asked permission 
in due succession, one shall, in the presence of the divine Fire, 
pronounce (this) hymn of praise : 

1. “(It has been) offered to Thee, o lotus-eyed one! Adoration to Thee, 
who produceth the universe ! Adoration to Thee, Hrsikesa, Supreme 
Spirit, primaeval one! 

2. Universal and common Supreme deity of gods and danavas ! I shall 
always take refuge with Thy two feet. 

3. Thou art the only one from whom the world emanates, and so also 
(the only one) who resumes (it). And Thou art unmanifested and 
the consenter, concealed by the maya (consisting) of the gunas. 

4. Lord . . . : the same title is given to Visnu Mbh. 12, 338, 4 ; and to £iva 
Mbh. 1, 223, 44 — • Lotus: thus in all the manuscripts (with the exception 
of D) : I have not adopted Meyer’s conjecture pSdmant. — Mark the curious 
saptamyadi. 

1. Instead of the first words most Mss. read “Thou hast been victorious...”. 
“Lotus-eyed” : a name of Visnu. The name of the (white) lotus, pundanka-, 
is often expressive of beauty. — Hrsikesa, another name of the god which 
has been explained in various ways. 

2. Danavas : a class of giants or demons, considered as implacable enemies of 
the gods, against whom they often warred. 

3. As the world first emanates from the Supreme Being and, at the end of a 
period, is resumed by and into It, I have avoided translating the words 

srajta and samharakah in the usual way (“creator and “destroyer”). 

“Unmanifcstcd” : the u. or “non-devcloped” ( avyakta -) state, in which all 



94 


4. The wise (men) who have taken refuge with Thee alone cross 
beyond the awful ocean (to wit) the cycle of mundane existence, 
the boundless receptacle of afflictions. 

5. Thou hast no outward appearance, no external aspect, no weapons, 
no abode; nevertheless Thou appearest in human form to Thy 
loving worshippers. 

6. Nothing is beyond the range of Thy sight (nothing takes place 
without your knowing it), (but) Thou art visible (perceptible) to 
nobody. There is nothing that Thou canst not attain (accomplish), 
(but) Thou canst not be attained (gained) by whomsoever. 

34. 1. Of the occupations (works) the first cause, of the words the highest 

which is to be expressed, for the yogins the ultimate complete fulfil- 
ment (attainment). They know that Thou art the highest place. 

2. I am afraid, 0 Lord of gods, in this very formidable moving on of 
transmigration ( samsara -). Protect me, O lotus-eyed one ! I do not 
know the highest place. 

3. In all the moments of time as well as in all the quarters of the sky, 
O Acyuta, Thou art contained, and in the body. My great fear 
continues. 

4. Even in other existences I (shall not have any) understanding 
(knowledge) other than from Thy lotus-like feet. When I shall have 
gained this, when I (shall) have acquired this abode, 

5. let this, when known, O God, not go to ruin for me, even in another 
existence, even in distress. My desire belongs to Thee. 

is synthetically centralized in the fundamental and essential unity of the being, 
is the principle and source of all manifestation. — “Consented’ : the same 
name is given to the Supreme Spirit in the body by the BhagG. 13, 22 (“the 
witness, the consenter, the supporter, the experiencer etc.”). — The three 
gunas are the constituents of prakrti - or nature. In the older texts may a is 
an incomprehensible wisdom, a more or less magic power of gods etc , a 
capability of achieving miraculous deeds, also applied to tricks of various 
kinds, but often especially used of the faculty of creating illusions. In the 
Bhagavadgita Krsna (God) says that the world fails to see His higher, 
true nature, because it is deluded by the threefold modes or constituents of 
nature (the gunas); but those who take refuge in Him alone penetrate 
beyond the maya consisting of the gunas (by which his higher, supreme and 
everlasting nature is concealed). See Bhag. 7, 13 ff. For these terms I also 
refer to my book Inleiding tot het Indische denken, Antwerpen 1948, p. 314 
and 315. 

34 1. “Highest place”; cf. Ill, 26, 4. 

3. Acyuta, name of Visnu : “the imperishable or permanent, firm one”. — 
“...contained, and in the body” according to the reading of the Mss. A 
and B : ca galas cast ; Meyer’s text has sarlre jagatas casi “and thou art in 
the body of the world”. 



95 


6. If it would not get lost, I will always be satisfied with so much. 
I exclusively yearn for Vfsnu's feet in all my existences”. — 

1. The sukta of the Purusa, of Hari leads to heaven, brings wealth, 
confers glory. This is a sacred knowledge of the Supreme Spirit; 
this is the highest meditation of yoga. 

2. One must live on fruits for a month : (then) one sees one's person 
in the Self; having eaten fruits one must fast and, for a month, 
subsist on water. 

3. One shall continually dwell in the wilderness and always mutter 
(the sukta of) this sage. (Being) concentrated, one shall thrice, at 
the moments of the three ablutions (i.e. at dawn, noon and sunset) 
bathe in water. 

4. One shall continually worship the sun with this sukta; having 
poured out with this oblations consisting of clarified butter one 
shall direct the thought towards (the sukta of) this sage. 

5. After a month one must live on fruits : (then) one will win heaven 
in three years. Devoted to Him (only), absorbed in mind by Him, 
intent upon concentration for ten years, giving one's undivided love 
to Him, 

6. (behaving like this) one will see the God Narayana, wdio is free 
from any illness, in person, (the god) W'ho is to he perceived with 
excessive exertion, the creator of the world, the undecaying. 

1. One must live holding to the law of a householder, being prepared 
in the right way, pure of observances ; one must direct the thought 
towards this god Narayana who is free from illness. 

2. At midnight one shall give up sleep, rise, and, pure and restrained 
in speech (silent), knowing the proper method (yoga), wiien all 
beings are fast asleep, concentrate one's mind in order to obtain 
union with the Universal Spirit (apply oneself to the practice of 
re-integration). 

3. Then, being seated in the correct (easy) manner, on an even spot, 
which is sheltered from the wind and free from sounds one shall 

2. See III, 14 3. 

1. A "householder T (grkcstkc-), a twice-born man in the period of his life after 
studentship, performing the duties of the father of a family, the master 
of a house, and an economically productive member of society. See, e-g., 
Buhlerh translation of Manti, SBE. 25, Index, p. 593; J. Jolly, Recht und 
Sitte, Strassburg 1S96, p. 1491 According to the Pet. Diet, the word 
KyZycklfto also occurs in the XsvQS.; cf. GarPur. P retake! pa 7, 49 
suvcrr.crg nyeycscrgcitcrr*. 

3. Before concentration is attempted the yogins place the body in a favourable 



96 


bring one’s left foot into close contact with the knee of the right 
(leg) (i.e. have one’s left foot rest on the right knee), 

4. after having drawn in the right foot, the left knee supporting, 
joining the hands in token of homage, (being) in a natural (and 
healthy) state, closing the eyes unto yoga. 

5. After pronouncing (the syllable) Ora to (in) one’s heart one shall 
unapprehensively collect one’s thoughts, then one shall concentrate 
oneself in meditation, and also the organs of sense, the ‘mind’ 
( mams ). 

37. 1. If one does not perceive anything else, nor see, nor hear (anything 

else), when one has no longer (any) reflection about yoga, then one 
is said to have attained (the goal). 

2. One shall, in one’s heart, concentrate one’s attention upon (the sukta 
of) this sage, seeing him (it), as it were, according to the sacred 
knowledge and precepts, and having controlled one’s breath and 
being seated, one shall, as long as one directs one’s thoughts towards 
the sage, • — 

3. being about to respire, and having also caused the ‘mind’ to go from 
under the navel, repeatedly breathe in this way; absorbed in mind 
by that one shall ‘raise the yoga’. 

4. Preparing, in this way, the equilibrium ( ?) one will neither see nor 
hear; then one shall gradually lead the mind above the heart, 

5. holding the collar-bones, the mouth, the nose and the eyes, the eye- 
brows in equipoise. In the space between the brows is the highest 
place; there one shall hold it firm(ly). 

38. 1. After holding it in the region of the forehead one shall, next, cause 

it to go to the skull, and breathing in due time, one shall, ‘having 
gone to the navel’ breath out once more. 

position, and one in which it can remain for a long time, and by which the 
contact with Power is furthered. For these asanas or bodily postures see 
M. Eliade, Techniques du Yoga, Paris 1948, p. 73 ff., and 247 ; A. Danielou, 
Yoga (see above), p. 25 ff., and 146 ff. 

4. The term brahmanjali also occurs AsvGS. 3, 5, 11 and Manu, 2, 70 and 71 
(where it is explained) : it is the ceremonious joining of the hollowed hands 
for the sake of the Sacred, while repeating the Veda etc. 

5. “Heart” : the reading handed down by the Mss. is far from being clear. — ■ 
— ‘Mind’ : the term maitas denotes the central organ which synthesizes the 
sense-data into percepts and carries out the decrees of the will through the 
organs of action. 

37. 2. “Sacred . . : sniti-, i.e. eternal sacred words and texts “seen” or heard by 

certain rsis. — “Controlling the breath” (JiranSySma -) is the voluntary 
interruption of the movement of breathing in and out. 



97 


2. This highest place is said to belong to Brahman, the Supreme Spirit. 
Having thus experienced this process of re-integration one finds 
the Great Spirit, the Self. 

3. Whether one be a virtuous and pure man or a great villain, when one 
has acquired (re-integration into) the high Brahman, one will, having 
learnt the happy issue, become holy. 

4. If one, adhering to all sorts of evil, has understood this and mutters 
it well-prepared, because of the very wish to possess supernormal 
knowledges, then one will go to the highest state (goal, to ultimate 
happiness). 

5. The concentration must constantly and separately be performed in 
accordance with the following prescribed rule of conduct. One shall 
fix the mind upon the sun, fire, the moon or upon the tops of trees, 

1. on the top of a mountain, or on the sea, or with whatsoever the 
heart is pleased. One shall, however, by no means fix the mind 
when (it) has attained to objects of the senses. 

2. Here, one should know, is much uneasiness, (whereas) the annihil- 
ation (of uneasiness) is brought about by concentration. In an impure 
family of virtuous people he is born again who has fallen from the 
practice of yoga. 

3. When one finds Brahman in the skull, one shall lead the best of 
sages upwards from the skull towards the highest light, towards the 
starr}' sky. 

4. Having reached (realized) the Lord of yoga (the object of yoga), 
being indifferent to the pairs of opposites, knowing the Supreme 
Spirit, the yogi, wholly intent upon the rsi, shall at all times see 
his own Self (the Self). 

4. “Highest state” : the phrase ( paramo or para gatiJi, cf. Ill, 40, 4) often 
occurs : Manu 4, 14 ; 6, 88 ; 93 ; 96 ; BhagG. 6, 45 (“The yogi who strives 
with assiduity . . . attains to the highest goal or state”), and the commentaries 
explain it by moksc- (“deliverance”) or “called moksa — “wish . . . super- 
normal knowledge”: abhijijnasanad which is a conjecture proposed by Meyer; 
one might refer to the well-known Buddhist (Pali) abhihna , (Skt) abhijna, 
used of special, supernormal power of apperception and knowledge and of 
psychic powers. See, e.g., P. Oltramare, L'histoire des idees theosophiques 
dans ITnde, II, Paris 1923, p. 369 ft. 

5. “Concentration” ( dkarana ) : having gone through the process by which the 
body and all the physical and mental obstacles are controlled, the yogin is 
ready for dharana which consists in maintaining the ‘mind' fixed on one 
spot. See. e.g., Eliade, o.c., p. 80 ft., and Danielou, o.c., p. 72. 

3. I suppose that r sisal tamam refers to the puritsa - or individual soul. It may, 
however, also refer to brahma. 

4. The “pairs of opposites” are cold and heat, joy and sorrow etc. 

7 



98 


5. And after bathing he shall always mutter this eminent means of 
purification; even if he is loaded with a crime which causes loss 
of caste, he will acquire high merit in the course of time. 

40. 1. Wholly devoted to ‘austerity’ {tapas), constantly speaking the truth, 

not envious, a brahman who mutters (the sukta of) this sage will in 
the course of time become one who leads an ascetic life in the woods. 

2. With whatsoever desire one always mutters (the sukta of) this rsi, 
that very desire will be fulfilled of him who performs the sacred 
acts and has faith (confidence, sraddha ). 

3. With whatever wish one performs an oblation with fire or a 
muttering of prayers, or gives an offering (presentation) or an 
oblation (of rice etc. : cam), one will be acquainted with (experience) 
its fulfilment. 

4. Superiority as to knowledge, great wealth, glory among men, the 
highest state, and deliverance by knowledge • — one will experience 
its fulfilment 

5. When one has reached the highest subtle (all-pervading Spirit), 
which, complete and firm (reliable), is attainable by knowledge, 
which is to be gained by excessive exertion, one joins the everlasting 
Brahman. 

6. The sukta (beginning with) “thousand-headed” gives the fruit of 
all desires through the person of Vedagarbha; he, indeed, is 
traditionally held to be Narayana. 

7. Brahma, Indra, Rudra, Parjanya are contained in this sukta. This 
world, (everything) stationary and movable, must be regarded as 
being there. 

41. 1* Even (a person) who does not reach (the goal) should not abandon 

his bhakti. The Highest Person, the Divine (venerable, holy) One 
(i bhagavan ) is known to sympathize with those who love Him 
devotedly (his bhaktas). 

40. 1. "... ascetic life.. thus the rarior lectio vant, the varia lectio is sukrti 

'having acquired merits, virtuous" (also found III, 39, 5). 

4. Superiority...: the word also occurs Yajh. 1, 262 Stenzlcr, another edition 
(Bombay 1882) has jdtisraisfhyam (jnatisutkrstatvam Comm.). — "Know- 
ledge" (Juana-), spiritual wisdom, integral and universal knowledge of 
Reality, distinct from discriminative knowledge. 

6. The name Vedagarbha which repeatedly occurs in the Vaisnava Bhagavata 
Purana. and literally means “full of the Veda" denotes Brahma, but has 
been transferred to Visnu. 

7. Although these gods, Indra excepted, are not mentioned by name in the 
sukta, Purusa 'contains’ them, because he is this all (st. 2), and more than 
that (st. 3). 



99 


2. For the sake of adoration of that god one shall, in accordance with 
the ceremonious rule of the inhabitants of the woods (viz. the 
ascetic aranyakas), daily scatter as offerings (earn) (cereals) of one's 
own procuring which have grown in the forest, 

3. At the end of die formula ‘Narciyanaya sz'dlid* one shall, up to a 
thousand times, sacrifice the oblations (in the fire) : then he (the 
god) gives ‘divine eye' to the sacrificer. 

4. Or one should scatter a thousand of cams in one series, or one 
should complete all (earns), as many as can be (scattered) in the 
course of one day. 

5. (Then) one will acquire the fruit of a thousand and (the enjoyment) 
of the objects desired. Or one will, in the possession of the full 
duration of a man’s life, wander over the earth as a (man) who 
has attained the highest object (a perfect one: siddha-). 

1. Narayana must always be meditated upon as being in the centre 
of the orb of the sun, as resting on the lotus-seat, as wearing a 
bracelet on the upper arm, as having ear-rings shaped like a makara 
(and) wearing a diadem, a garland of pearls, having a beautiful 
golden figure, and bearing a conch-sliell and a discus. 

2. (The man) who adores the adorable feet of Narayana and recites 
this sukta in its entirety goes, through this eminent recitation, to 
the abode of the everlasting Visnu, which is free from old age and 
death. 

3. The sages regularly worship Hari with a burnt offering in the fire, 
in the water with flowers, with meditation in the heart, with a 
muttered prayer in the orb of the sun. 

1. Bhakti: loving- attachment to God, supreme longing for Him for its own 
sake, without seeking sensual desires, surrender in trusting in God etc.: see 
A. M. Esnoul, La bhakti (in L. Renou-J. Filliozat, LTnde classique, I, Paris 
1947, p. 661 ft. : S. Radhakrishnan, The Bhagavadgita, London 194S, p. 59 ft.; 
J. Gonda, in Tijdschrift voor Philosophic, Louvain, 10 (1948), p. 607 ft. 
“Highest Person”: Purusottamah, a name of Visnu-Krsna. — “Divine etc.”: 
Bhagavdn. 

2. For the cam of the anchorites see Manu, 6, 11. 

3. Svaha: III. 7 , 4. — “Divine eye”: supernormal vision, or spiritual vision 
consisting in a kind of hyperaesthetic perception of objects invisible to nor- 
mal men. Visnu and the sun: Macdonell, VM., p. 39 and 41; Hopkins, EM. 
p. 203; Keith. RPh., p. 109; Renou, in Renou-Filliozat, o.c., p. 323. For the 
god’s attributes etc. : Kirfel, Bilderatlas (see above), p. XII ft. — A makara- 
is a kind of sea-monster. — “Bearing a conch-shell” ; I propose reading 
dhrta- instead of ghrta-, which mean “illuminated, shining”. 

3. See III, 29, 2. 


102 


3. And one shall use this (text) on behalf of a king who is prepared 
for war; (then) he will (no doubt) conquer all his enemies and not 
be defeated by other peoples (or: by his adversaries). 

4. And on a journey this (sukta) is a benediction : when travelling on 
one’s way one defends (oneself and others) from robbers, and all 
goblins ( bhuta -), snakes, and malevolent demons (pisaca-). — 

5. A person desirous of offspring who, (being) pure, mutters the sukta 
of the rsi Bhutamsa soon obtains suitable offspring: there is no 
doubt. 

3. 1. A twice-born man shall worship the ‘Nasatyas’, the Asvins with a 

dish of rice (or barley) boiled in milk. After having sacrificed with 
this act of reverence he shall consecrate horses (with sacred verses). 

2. After having collected, when the sun has risen, food prepared with 
milk, a dish consisting of sesamum, a mixture of rice and peas, 
and meat, porridge, a barley-meal with coagulated milk, sour gruel 
and a dish of parched grains, and fruits of various sorts, 

3. a brilliant ornament, a garland, auspicious perfumes and food and 
drinks, food to be masticated and food which may be eaten without 
mastication, and beverages, 

4. he should concentrate his attention upon (the sukta of) Bhutamsa 
until the sun has set. When, then, midnight has passed, he should, 
thereupon, offer (the oblations) to the Asvins. 

5. Then he will have a long-lived, handsome, and fiery son. And he 
will always be handsomely formed who always concentrates his 
attention upon (the sukta of) Bhutamsa. — 

whilst muttering this sukta, RV. 10, 152 and the Sauparna text (3, 12, 13). 
— As to the evil-averting character of the sukta cf. st, 1; 4; 12. 

1-2. Cf. II, 24, 5. 

2. In the sukta various services rendered by the god and expected from him 
are enumerated. 

3. Instead of 'paraih I should like to read paraih. 

4. Cf. I, 26, 1. — Bhutas etc. often occur together. 

5. Bhutamsa is the reputed seer of R.V. 10, 106, which is addressed to the 
Asvins. Although the sukta itself does not hint that it is connected with 
•procreation, BD. 8, 18 fC relates that Bhutamsa, being desirous of offspring, 
performed rites and "praised the gods in pairs" with this text, 

3 1. Asvins: I, 23, 5. — Horses (trow-): on account of the Asvins, 

2. Sesamum etc.: compare similar dishes in other texts, e.g. the Vaikhfmasa- 
sutra 4, 13, which is also a Vai?nava work. 

3. Instead of bhakfam (Meyer's text) “food" the reading of the Mss. AC 
bhaksyam (“food to be masticated", often followed by bhojyam) should be 
adopted. 



103 


4. 1. The clever (man) should know that (the sukta of) this rsi is a fill- 

filler of all wishes. Regular in observances one shall mutter this 
(sukta, to wit) “not certainly the gods” : 

2. Then one will (soon) find food wherever one is present. The clever 
(man) who might think himself to be afflicted by evil, 

3. should mutter it being self-governed: (then) Evil (the evil power) 
will make light of him (pay no attention to him)* — When one is 
desirous of speech one shall, whilst sacrificing, take refuge with 
Speech, quickly muttering these (stanzas, to 

4. wit) “I with the Rudras (and so on)” ; (then) one becomes eloquent, 
honoured* — The inspired seer {muni-) shall mutter the sukta, 
consisting of eight stanzas addressed to the ‘All-gods’ (and beginning 
with) “not him” : 

5. (thereby) he destroys all his stains and competes with 'all the godsb 
— At night one should, (being) pure and having observed a vow, 
take always refuge with Night, 

6. if one would wish: “I would never be born again in wombs”. (If 
this is the case) one should mutter in thought the sukta “Night” a 
thousand times every night. 

4 1. The text referred to is RV. 10, 117, which is called a dhanannadanaprasamsa 

“a text in praise of gifts of wealth and food’* by the author of the Anu- 
kramanika. The sukta exhorts man to give to him who needs alms ; the 
wealth of those who give will not lessen, but the miser will never meet a 
man who shows compassion or favour. 

3. Evil : cf., e.g., AthV. 11, 8, 19 “Sleep, Weariness, Misery, the deities 
called Evils . . ” 

4. “I with the Rudras”: RV. 10, 125, in which Vac, “Speech”, who is the 
reputed rsi, describes herself and her pow'er. Compare especially st. 5 “I 
make every man whom I love, a powerful personality, a brahman, an rsi, 
very' intelligent”. — “Not him” are the first words of RV. 10, 126, which, 
according to the Anukramanika belongs to the Visve Devah (cf. I, 5, 1), 
according to BD. 8, 43 f. to Aryaman, Mitra and Varuna, who are repeatedly 
mentioned by name and said to protect man from danger and to lead him 
safely. In st. 8 the Vasus are requested to deliver the person praying c.s. 
from amhas (“evil consisting in distress etc.”). See also Macdonell, BD. II, 
p. 304. — Instead of hitvd (Meyer) read halva* 

5. RV. 10, 127 is addressed to Ratri “Night”, who is, among other things, 
invoked to keep away the wolf and the thief, and to guide her worshippers 
to safety. As to the ritual use of this sukta we might compare AitAr. 3, 
2, 4 (quoted by Sayana in his introduction to it, also mentioning its application 
in case of an evil dream) “if one (in a dream) sees a black man with black 
teeth, a boar killing him , . . he should fast and cook a pot of milk, and 
offer it reciting a verse of RV. 10, 127 to each oblation”. Qahkh.GS. 5, 5, 9 
prescribes the sukta in case of a bad dream or when a crow is heard in 
the dead of night etc., whilst sacrificing milk. 

6. Cf. II, 35, 5. — Compare especially SVidh. 3, 8, 1 ft. 



104 


7. And one shall worship Night every day, at night, with a dish of 
rice or barley boiled in milk ( sthalipdka -). Absorbed in mind by 
that the man who behaves conformably to the eternal norm 
(dharma-) shall be seated at night and stand by day. 

5. 1. And after a year (the person performing this rite) should offer an 

oblation ( cant ) prepared in milk — a thousand times a burnt- 
offering is performed by means of that by day — 

2. at night, in the first part (of the night), (whilst being) concentrated 
upon Night. And by day a necessary (religious act) must be per- 
formed, by a (person who) has the disposal of the sun’s energy 
(brilliance), in a shady (covered) place. 

3. Thus, well-prepared for the solemn performance and composed he 
shall mutter the sukta in thought. In the third year he shall prepare 
an oblation ( earn ) with clarified butter. 

4. Then the goddess Night, the star-spangled one, becomes ready to 
answer his prayers. He should make his request to that goddess 
when she, willing to grant his wishes, has come of her own accord. 

5. “In this year, in this season, in this month, at this day, or even at 
this moment it will be your time of departure (from this world), 
my dear”, thus (she will speak), loving (him). 

6. 1. One should reach that time whilst muttering this very sukta addres- 

sed to Night; (then) one will not fall again into the condition of 
(being born from) a womb, and one rids one’s self of all sorts 
of evil. • — 

2. (Prompted) by all kinds of desire a twice-born (man) may mutter 
this (sukta) : “to me, Agni, vital power (and so on)”, whilst offering 
clarified butter with this very (sukta) : (then) he will (soon) gain 
all objects of his desire. — 

3. Constant in the observance of one’s vows one shall always mutter 
the sukta (beginning with) “which prepare”: (then) one will not 
be injured by enchantments and fierce incantations. 

5. 2. I should like to compare amsutejas- with suryafejas- AthV. 10, 5, 27. I 

read bhage ratrisamahitah, the reading adopted by Meyer only being given 
by C 1 . 

6. 2. “To me, Agni, vital power”: RV. 10, 128 which is, apart from a different 

verse-order etc., also found in the Ath.V. (S, 3). Addressed to various gods 
(‘Visve Devah’; Anukramanika) it invokes them for protection, realization 
of wishes, and various blessings. KausS. uses it in rites for ‘vital power' 
or ‘brilliance’ (y areas), for prosperity, for avoidance of quarrels (12, 10; 
22, 14; 38, 26), and so on. It is also variously employed in AthVPar. (17, 
2, 9 ; 20, 4, 1 in a ritual in honour of Skanda ; 46, 2, 1 in a rite concerning 
vratas ; and so on). Compare also Qaiikh.GS. 3, 1, 8. 



105 


4. (The man) over whom the experts cast a charm by means of the 
practices taught by Angiras wards them all off by the practice of 
Pratyarigirasa. 

5. He who is well-versed in the (lore and practices of) Pratyangirasa 
will never suffer wrong. Enchantments do not injure him, be they 
known (perceived) or unknown (unexpected). 

1. Be it calumny or injurious speech, (uttered) by (a person) who 
knows him or by one who does not know him, by an irritated or by 
an impatient (person), evil (enas) doet not stain (the man) who 
knows that. 

2. One should constantly mutter (the sukta of) this rsi to be a benedic- 
tion ; the rsi himself declared that it is a general expiation. 

3. When settling in a place in the mountains, and also in towns, in 
villages and in houses, one should always mutter (the sukta of) 
this sage. 

4. (The man) who is familiar (with these rites) should have a golden 
jewel (amulet) of three parts (strings) made which has been poured 
over with a thousand leavings : then he should, with (the sukta of) 
that rsi 

5. fasten it to his head, neck, or breast. Enchantments do not injure 
him, be they known (perceived) or unknown (unexpected). 

3. The next sukta quoted is a khila, beginning with the words “which 
prepare...”: Scheftelowitz, p. 113 ff., RgVeda ed- S. K. p. 960 f. ; no. 4, 5. 
It consists of 40 stanzas and has several particulars in common with AthV. 
10, 1 which is used against witchcraft and its practisers. According to BD. 
8, 45 this sukta (of which the 1st stanza enjoins the formidable magical act 
or enchantment prepared by the foes to turn back towards the performers 
themselves) is destructive of sorcery. AVPar. 32, 2 classes this and other 
texts of the same character in a group to be used for counteracting sorcery, 
vdiich corresponds to the list of texts prescribed in KausS. 39, 7 in a rite 
against witchcraft. See also M. Bloomfield, Hymns of the Atharvaveda, 
Oxford 1897 (SEE 42), p. 602. — Cf. SVidh. 3, 5, 5-7. 

4. Pratyangirasa is a mythical or legendary personage regarded as the father 
of certain rcah (stanzas). See e.g. ViPur. 1, 15, 136; VayuPur. 66, 78. 
According to the commentary on ViPur. the so-called Pratyarigirasas are 
the divinities laying claim to the 35 stanzas beginning with “which prepare”. 
AVPar 3, 1, 10 a domestic priest who has held that office in another family, 
to whom objection is made, is called a praty angiras. (Cf. also AgniPur. 
260, 10). 

2. The “expiation for everything” ( sarvaprayascittain ) is mentioned Atharva- 
prayascittani (ed. J. von Xegelein, JAOS. 33) 4, 1; 2; 6, 1 (s-m juhuyat 
etc.) See eg CarikhGS. 1, 9, 12; Oldenberg, SBE. 29, p. 28, and especially 
A. Hillebrandt, Das altindische Neu- und Vollmondsopfer, Jena 1880, p. 166. 

4. Three: see IV, 17, 4. 



106 


S. 1. With this same sukta (the man) who knows (these rites and precepts) 
shall, on behalf of kings, have a jewel (amulet) made of a uniformly 
red colour, and the consecration by means of mantras (shall be) of 
the same length (as aforesaid). 

2. Ill hostile encounters he shall consecrate with magical formulas the 
tops of standards and the musical instruments, and the seats and 
couches, and the various vehicles. 

3. By the practice prescribed by Pratyahgirasa one wards off all that 
(all those magical contrivances) even of the sage Ahgiras himself, 
when he in person is putting into practice spells for malevolent 
purposes. 

4. Yriien muttering this sukta one may put into practice spells against 
other beings but men (to wit) evil spirits raised by magic, (then) 
one gets rid of all disadvantageous (influences) ; how much less fear 
there will be of a human being? 

5. If one wall practise austerities, be self -governed, restrained, (and) 
use (the sukta of) the rsi, one overcomes all (evil), (all influences 
which disturb) ones soulfs happiness are) allayed; for austerity 
(fapas) is a very great power. — 

9. 1. The important sukta of the Daksayanas gives a long life, bestows 

rigour -conducive to the duration of life. Let (a man) proride him- 
self with a golden amulet and mutter the Daksavana-text. 

8 2. Compare AYPar. 4, 1. 

3. Aii rims : I have adopted Meyer's conjecture. 

4. I diride hriya sit hi am. A hrfya is a magical performance, often represented 
as a kind of female evil spirit or sorceress. See PeL Diet. I, 402. 

9. 1. In the Kashmir collection of the khilas the sukta following no. 4, 5 yam 

kalpaycmti and immediately preceding RY. 10, 129 is the one which begins 
with ayzisyam ‘'bestowing length of life” (Scheftelowitz, p. 117 f. ; RgVeda 
SK. p. 953; r.o. 4, 6). BD. S, 45, which bears out this statement calls it “a 
praise of gold". The Daksayanah are the reputed rsis. The deity to which 
tills sukta is addressed is Hiranva “Gold” ; the Khila-anukramam also calls it 
a Hiranyatviashih- “Self-praise in connection with gold”. As the descendants 
of the prajapati (progenitor of beings) Daksa, Brahma's son, viz. the Daksa- 
yanas are repeatedly mentioned in connection with gold (cf. also (?Br. 6, 7, 
4, 2), it becomes clear how this text, in which the word “gold”, moreover, 
often occurs, could be used with a golden amulet to gain good luck etc. 
AsvGS. 3, 8, 21 uses this sukta on behalf of a person desiring to go home. 
Part of the stanzas are also found in AthY. ; among them 7 — AthV. 1, 35, 
2 and S = AthY- 1, 35, 1; they read like this; “Xot demons, not pisacas 
overcome it, for this is the first-born power of the gods; who bears the gold 
of D.’s descendants, makes for himself long life among gods and men. 'What 
gold the descendants of D., well-disposed, bound on for CatanTka, that I bind 
for me to a long life of a hundred years . . — Amulet : for the word 



107 


2. Then he is likely to receive the gifts of Fortune and he gains much 
food. — One must mutter the next two suktas which are evolutional 5 
and purificatory, and which consist of seven stanzas each 

3. after revering Prajapati : (then) one obtains all objects of one’s 
desire. — One must mutter (the sukta beginning with) “There was 
not the non-existent” and sacrifice, totally devoted to yoga. 

4. Then one gains intimate union with Prajapati in twelve years. — 
Let (a man) who suffers from a disease observe his vows, mutter 
(the sukta) “And, O gods”, 

5. and after having put down a jar of ghee sacrifice in the fire. He 
shall have the remnants from the jar put in another bowl, made 
of brass. 

6. If there happens to be neither drink nor food, one should perform 
this. When one has, with that clarified butter, anointed one’s body 
one will gradually come into the possession of food. 

7. One may also mutter this (sukta) whilst anointing the body of (a 
person) who suffers from disease, with the same butter; he should 

alamkdrcL'- see my remarks New Indian Antiquary, Thomas Comm. Vol., Bom- 
bay 1939, p. 97 ff. — A golden ornament and ‘vigour’ : Qankh.GS. 3, 1, 7. 

2. The next two . . . : the text refers to RV. 10 ) 129 and 130 consisting of seven 
stanzas each. The statement that these two suktas are “evolutional, relating 
to cosmogony” is also found BD. 8, 46; the commentator Sadgurusisya gives 
the explanation “(relating to) the origin of the categories)”. The reputed rsi 
of 10, 129 is Prajapati Paramesthin; according to BD. 8, 45 the sukta belongs 
to (is addressed to) Paramesthin; the rsi of 10, 130 is Yajna, Prajapati’s son. 

3. “There was not the non-existent (non-being)” : the first words of the famous 
‘hymn of creation’ RV. 10, 129, which explains the origin of the world as 
the evolution of the existent from the non-existent. — Though only mentioned 
once in the RV. (10, 121) as the supreme God, who created heaven and earth, 
Prajapati is often in the AthV., and regularly in the brahmanas, regarded 
as the chief among divine beings. — The last stanza may have been a special 
starting-point of the line of thought found in the RVidh. : the surveyor of 
this creation in the highest heaven (God) knows — or does not know — 
whence it has arisen. 

4. “And, O gods”; the sukta RV. 10, 137 is referred to. It is dedicated to the 
Visve Devah (Anukr.), or to the gods (st. 1), to Vata (“Wind”, 2-4), to the 
All-gods (5), to the Waters (6-7) (BD. 8, 49 f.). The sukta, which is for the 
greater part identical with AthV. 4, 13 (see Whitney-Lanman, p. 168), 
invokes these divinities to raise up again the man who is “put down”, to blow 
away physical weakness, to “blow hither” ability and medicine, to rescue and 
so on. BD. 8, 50 states that it “may be considered as containing universal 
remedies or as destructive of infirmity. VaitS. 38, 1 uses AthV. 4, 13 in a 
healing ceremony on behalf of a sacrificer who falls ill. AthVPar. 32, 9 
reckons it to the ayusya - texts (which are “preservative of life”), cf. also 32, 
18; 26; 27 (where it is used for the sake of stint i- “destruction of evil, 
expiatory influence etc.”). 



10S 


be anointed when his food is undigested: then he becomes free from 
fever and at ease. — 

10. 1. Let (a man) who is desirous of wealth apply this (sukta): “Agni, 

to (us) speak 0 . Self-governed, having sacrificed with clarified butter, 
he shall mutter (the text) again and again by myriads. 

2. He shall ten times pour into the fire a thousand fuel-sticks consist- 
ing of khadira-wood ; (then) he will prosper by increase of property 
together with (the possession of) a wife. 

3. When he is desirous of wealth he should pour into the fire fuel of 
the biha- (wood-apple tree, Aegle marmelos), udumbara- (Ficus 
glomerata), and paldsa- (Butea frondosa), and also (fuel) of the 
rohitaka - (Andersonia rohitaka) : then he will prosper by increase of 
property. 

4. Using fuel which comes from the vibhldaka-trvz (Terminalia 
bellerica), a man who eats every half month should pour out (into 
the fire) fuel-sticks of bilva-wood with the 'hate of the hating' ; at 
the end of that he should use this sukta. 

5. (By means of this procedure) he kills a rich enemy and gains the 
property of (this) enemy. Or (this sukta) should be muttered by a 
(person) desiring increase of property and wealth. — 

11, 1. One shall mutter (the sukta beginning with) “This praiser, O Agni", 

when there is fear of fire. One shall (first), in accordance with the 
ritual prescript, satisfy the fire with milk, coagulated milk, ghee, 
and so on. 

7. I have adopted the reading of some Mss. : sukht bhavaii vijvarah. 

10 1. “Agni, to (us) . . : RV. 10, 141. The Anukramanika holds this sukta to be 

addressed to the Visve Derail, BD. 8, 53 f. (but see Macdonell, p. 307 f.) says 
that it belongs to Agni (who is mentioned as sole divinity in st. 1 and 6, 
whereas the names of many gods occur in 2-5) and to the Visve Devali. In 
st. 1 Agni is called a giver of wealth, in st. 2 various gods are requested 
“to bestow” and to give possessions; cf. also st. 6. This text is included in 
AthV. 3, 20, which is prescribed by KausS. 41, 8 in a rite for success in 
winning wealth. 

4. ‘Hate . . : see above, I, 19, 4. 

5. Instead of “kills” most Mss. give “sacrifices”. 

11. 1. “This praiser, O Agni”: 3J.V. 10, 142, addressed to Agni, and, according to 

the Anukramanika and BD. S, 54, pronounced by the four Congas, Jaritar, 
Drona, Sarisrkta and Stambamitra, who praised the god each with a couplet 
of two verses. According to the tradition (see Mbh. 1, ch. 229-233) Agni, 
whilst burning the great Khandava forest, spared the lives of the four little 
sons of the ascetic Mandapala (who had temporarily assumed the shape 
of a sarngaka bird to beget offspring with a female s.), after Mandapala 
himself and afterwards the young birds (to wit Jaritar etc.) had praised him, 
RV. 10, 142, 3 states that Agni, though consuming (the forest), passed over 



109 


2. And while he desires to protect from fire in person, so long he 
should go towards the four quarters and ‘carry round’ (the stanza) 
“This (here) of the water” with a continuous gush of water. 

3. Having become, as it were, a large piece of water, he is close by a 
remedy against fire. — Having come to the wilderness one shall 
purchase a patha (Clypea hernandifolia) with a handful of barley. 

4. “If you belong to Soma, I purchase you, herb, for Soma! If you 
belong to Varuna, then I purchase you for Varuna! 

5. Or for the Vasus, or for the Rudras, or also for the Adityas. Should 
you belong to the ‘All-gods’, then I purchase you for them all !” 

6. After having first thrown (down) flowers together with the herb 
and (creeping) plants one receives (gets hold of) the power of it 
there where one will perform the rite. 

7. One shall put it down in the midst of herbs in the open space. With 
regard to the gathering of herbs there shall in every case be this 
direction : 

2. 1. One shall dig up the patha whilst muttering (the sukta) “This”, 

and in the early morning one shall have it crushed, in the sacrificial 
session, by a brahmacarin (a student of the Veda), 

2. and, in default of such a person, by somebody who fulfils a religious 
vow, by a virgin, or by a brahman. (Being) pure, one shall, in the 
early morning, drink (from) it thrice, together with ghee, after it 
(the crushed patha) has been consecrated 

3. with the sukta (beginning with) “This”, a hundred times, (but) at 
least ten times: by that (rite) one wards off a female rival (fellow- 
wife), and (one) becomes very much esteemed by one’s husband. 

4. The husband, on the other hand, shall mutter over it and (then) for 

much grass; st. 7 says that “here is a receptacle of water, the dwelling of 
ocean”, and st. 8 speaks about pieces of water and lotus-flowers, common 
devices in magical texts prescribed to prevent conflagration (cf. eg. AthV. 6, 
106). KausS. 52, 5 whilst using AthV. 6, 106, has a hole made inside the 
house which is to be protected against fire and water conducted into it. — 
St. 7 begins with the words “This (here) of the water” ( apam idam)”. 

3 ff. The sukta is quoted 12, 1 and 3 The plant patha (thus the Mss. and the 
commentary on AthV 2, 27, 4) or pafa (this form seems to be given in all 
the AthV. Mss. (Caun.) and also in AthV.Paipp, ; see Whitney-Lanman, 
p. 68) is the Clypea hernandifolia, which grows all over India and whose 
bitter root is much used 

4. Cf. ApGS. 3, 9, 5 yadi vantny asi varunat tva niskrinam i yadi saitmy asv 
somat tva niskrinamtti; and GobhGS. 2, 6, 6 ff., which has these formulas 
spoken during the pumsavana-rite (compare, in this connection II, 11, 7 “in 
every case”; see also Meyer, p. XXIX). 



110 


a week drink the patha with milk with this (sukta) : (thus) he wards 
off (his) rivals. 

5. (The woman) who wishes to win a (her) husband by means of other 
spells and charms, finding no place in heaven, dwelling in Yama’s 
world, sinks into a hell. 

13. 1. Also ground roots and herbs which are prescribed in a different 

manner might ruin a man; one should, therefore, not perform 
another (rite). 

2. (The woman) who is affable to her husband, whose husband is her 
chief object of devotion, and who is fair of speech — (for her this 
rite) is a powerful means of propitiating (charming) her husband. 

3. After approaching a beloved husband she shall drink this herb. They 
call him who, through folly, treats an affable and lawful wife, who 
is intent on virtue and irreproachable, contemptuously 

4. the vilest of men. — One shall repeatedly mutter the sukta (begin- 
ning with) “O Aranyani”, (when one is) in forests, 

12. 3. “This”: the text refers to RV. 10, 145 which, consisting of 6 stanzas, is 

regarded as a sapatnlbadhcmam “a means of oppressing female rivals”, pro- 
nounced by IndranI (Anukramanika and Sayana’s introduction to this sukta). 
The BD., however, gives an explanation which is a little more detailed and 
fits in better with the text of RVidh. (BD. 8, 55 ss.) : “ 'This (plant) I dig' 
is the sukta which (the goddess) IndranI herself recited (in metrical language) ; 
they declared it to be an esoteric (aupanisada-) evolutional ( bhavavrtta is 
the term applied to this text, because it contains spells with women?, cf. IV, 
9, 2) sukta of six stanzas. She praises the potent herb patha (sic) with its 
extended leaves in this sukta. The last stanza is intended to win the love of 
a husband (cf. RVidh. IV, 13, 2, where the text has patyuh samvmanam : 
patisamvanam BD.), while the rest are (stanzas to be used) to repel a rival 
wife (cf. RVidh. IV, 12, 3). The use of this sukta (which, apart from an 
exchange of place of two stanzas, is AthV. 3, 18) is quite appropriate to its 
contents : “I dig this herb . . . with which one drives away one's rival, with 
which one wins completely one's husband (1) . . . Blow (AthV thrust) away 
my rival, make my husband exclusively mine (2) etc.” The AthV. text is 
prescribed by KausS. (36, 19-21), among women's rites, in a charm for getting 
the better of a rival (Caland, Zauberritual, p. 122 f.) ; ApGS. 3, 9, 4 ff. 
mentions a variant form of this interesting rite : in order to make her husband 
subject and to overcome his other wives, a woman has to strew barley grains 
around the clypea hernandifolia with the formula quoted above (note on IV, 
11, 4). See also Sayana, Intr. to RV. 10, 145. 

5. The word mulamantra-, translated by "spells and charms” (lit. "roots and the 
muttering of spells”), is, according to the comm, on Sana, Kad. p. 195 N. 
(102 P.), an upalaksatja- (an elliptic term used in a generic sense : mamma- 
dJiukaradwisottaranahctfwdm saroesdm api samgrahah), although it may also 
mean ‘fundamental formula”. — Cf. QBr. 9, 5, 2 f 16. — The verb jetum 
“to win, conquer” may. also mean "to rule”: cf. Manu 4, 217 “those who 
in all matters are ruled by women”. 



Ill 


5. after having adored Aranyani : he (the man who does so) escapes 
from the forest. — Whoever is desirous of ‘faith* and concentrated 
shall constantly mutter the sukta of Faith : 

1. he will gain faith everywhere; — in like manner the sukta of 
Intelligence. One shall obtain a brahml and, constant in the obser- 
vance of vows, mutter the two suktas. 

2. Then one shall drink it (the crushed brahml) according to one’s 
ability : after three days one will bring success near. One shall drink 
the sankhapuspi (Andropogon aciculatus) with milk, the brahml- 
flowers with clarified butter, 

3. the safavari (Asparagus racemosus) with milk, the vaca (a kind of 
aromatic root) with water or ghee. After consecrating them with 
these two suktas one shall drink them one by one for three days. 

4. (Then) one acquires faith, intelligence (mental vigour), memory, 
prosperity, power, and good fortune, obtains the highest success 
and attains a long life. 

5. Or one shall meditate on the two suktas in thought : (then) one will 
bring success near. — “A ruler truly” : (this is) a sukta which kills 
rivals for him who wishes to conquer an army. 

4. 'O Aranyani” : RV. 10, 146, addressed to the goddess A., who represents the 
jungle or forest. Cf. especially st. 5 “A. does not hurt (the person who stays 
in the jungle), when another (to wit a tiger or a robber) does not approach 
(assail) him’*. 

5. The sukta of Faith (Belief : sraddha) : RV. 10, 151 which is addressed to 
Craddha (Anukr., BD. 8, 58), through whom property is obtained (st. 4). 
See also IV, 19, 1. 

1. “The sukta of Intelligence” : the text refers to a khila which in the BD. 
(8, 58) comes next after RV. 10, 151 and is no. 4, 8 in the collection edited 
by Scheftelowitz (p. 121 ss.) and RgVeda S. K. (p. 966). The sukta states 
that various divinities have conferred intelligence upon the person speaking 
(st. 1 f.) and invokes Agni to make him intelligent through the intelligence 
revered by gods and fathers : cf . IV, 14, 4. — Brahml is, among other things, 
the name of various plants (see Pet. Diet. V, 152) ; it is repeatedly mentioned 
in medical and magical texts; see, e.g., Var. BS. 48, 41 (and Kern’s note: 
H. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften, I, The Hague 1913, p. 315, n. 1) and AthV- 
Par. 1, 44, 10. 

2. For the sankhapuspi see also Manu 11, 148. 

5. Cf. Ill, 22, 3. — “A ruler truly” : RV. 10, 152, 1, addressed to Indra, and, 
apart from some different readings etc., agreeing with AthV. 1, 20, 4 and 1, 
21. KausS. 14, 7 reckons AthV. 1, 19-21 among the battle-texts, or to the 
group going by the name of “unconquered” ; AthV. 1, 21 is further reckoned 
to the group of texts which free from fear or danger (KausS. 16, 8 note). 
Sayana (introd. to RV. 10, 152) says that the priest should look at a king 
who is prepared for battle with this sukta; see note on IV, 2, 1. 



112 


15. 1. It must be used by a pure (man). He shall sacrifice on that occasion 

for the sake of success. Or it should be muttered by him who goes 
towards an encounter with an enemy. 

2. “A ruler truly”, (by this text) he who (wishes) to kill, will suppress 
(the actions of) all enemies. For the sake of the removal of bad luck 
one shall regularly mutter (the sukta of) Sirimbitha. 

3. Having taken a branch of the apamarga together with a bunch of 
sacrificial grass and virana - (Andropogon muricatus) one shall 
constantly purify oneself underneath and at the top’, 

4. and one shall sacrifice clarified butter with it a thousand times 
thousand (offerings) : (by doing so) one removes from one’s person 
the ill-luck of a hundred years in three days. 

5. When one undertakes a candrayana one shall mutter this siikta 
which produces success : (then) one removes from one’s person the 
bad luck even of a thousand years. — 

16. 1. Having taken a bunch of sacrificial grass one shall sprinkle (a 

person) who is seized by consumption and mutter the sukta “I 
release you with the burnt offering”; (by doing so) one removes 
the consumption. 

2. One shall, in accordance with the ritual prescripts, sacrifice in the 
fire, which has been kindled, with clarified butter; (then) one shall 

15 2. £irimbitha Bharadvaja is the reputed rsi of RV. 10, 155. The word also 

occurs as a common noun in RV. 10, 155, 1. See Macdonell-Keith, II, p. 381. 
BD. 8, 60 and the Anukr. concur in considering this sukta as destructive of 
bad luck. 

3. Apamarga, a plant, which on account of the etymology of its name assumed 
by the Indians (apa-marj^ “to wipe off”) as well as certain biological pecu- 
liarities was often used to wipe off the influences of evil powers. See eg. 
Bloomfield, The Atharva-Veda, p. 67 and 69; Henry, M., p. 275. — A 
bunch . . . grass : darbha especially of kusa (see III, 42, 4). — Virana - or 
virina-, a fragrant grass, supposed to ward off demons etc. 

5. “Bad luck” : BD. 8, 60 has the same term (alaksmi-). — Candrayana : I, 6, 2. 

16 1. “I release . . : RV. 10, 161 which is “a remedy destructive of consumption” 

(BD. 8, 64). The same authority adds that this sukta, which is attributed to 
the sage Prajapatya Yaksmanasana (“P. who removes or destroys yaksma”), 
is spoken of as destroying rujayaksma, a dangerous disease “pulmonary 
consumption etc/’ (see J. Jolly, Medicin, Strassburg 1901, p. 88 f. and H. 
R. Zimmer, Hindu Medicine, Baltimore 1948, p. 26). According to Sayana 
(introd to RV. 161) the text must be used whilst sacrificing to alleviate 
diseases, and AsvGS. 3, 6, 4 f. has it applied on behalf of a diseased person, 
a suffering one and a man who has been seized by yaksma. Stanza 1-4 are 
also AthV. 3, 11, 1-4, a text which is used by KausS. 27, 32 f. in a general 
healing ceremony and AthVPar. 32, 7 is classed with the texts destructive 
of takman - “fever” (Jolly, Medicin, p. 70 f.) (32, 9 it forms part of a collection 
conducive to longevity). 



113 


pour out the residue in the clarified butter and drink milk with the 
residues. 

3, Iti the vessel of the residues (one shall pour) ghee (sarj>is) and there 
one shall preserve (the) pounded stuff (flour) : there will be one’s 
consecrated eatables and drinkables. 

d, One shall, with water, work up pieces of khadirn-wood into flour, 
and prepare a liquor from them amt drink it together with honey 
and clarified butter. 

5, On this occasion and the other one should use the sukta “I release 
you with the burnt offering': by this performance one removes the 
consumption from the body. — 

1. A woman whose embryo might come to naught shall, under those 
circumstances, pour a burnt-offering into the fire, with clarified 
butter, in accordance with the ritual prescripts, (whilst pronouncing 
the sukta beginning with) “Agni, joining RrahmaA 

2. Then the pregnant woman, having anointed herself with the remain- 
der of the clarified butter, shall bring forth her child. She shall, 
then, drink the remainder of the clarified butter: (then) the child 
will be born alive. 

3. And if they perish after they have been born, she shall prepare 
clarified butter which has been consecrated, and offer it with the 
formula ‘‘With Brahma . . she shall pour out the remnants on 
a jewel (amulet). 

d. This amulet, them should, on a threefold thread, be enveloped in 
the ealix of a young bud of the Indian fig-tree (banyan or Ficus 
iudica) together with a garment, — wrapped in white and red. 

5. Then it must be consecrated, in accordance with the ritual prescripts, 


1. The text refers to 1JV. 10, 1 (>2, which, according to BD. 8, (>$ f. is “said to 
he demon-slaying and addressed to Agui ; it is also recognized as a conse- 
crating text for children issuing from the womb (before the right time)". 
Siniihulv, Siiyaua has the text used to protect the foetus and to prevent 
miseaniage. Stanza 1 reads like this: “Let Agni, the destroyer of demons, 
joining Brahma, dispel the disease-demon from here who, having an ominous 
name, rests on your child (and) your womb”. In order to protect the embryo 
Oaukh. GS. 1, 21 pi escribes a sacrifice consisting of six oblations from a 
mess of cooked food, etc , whilst pronouncing K.V, 10, 102 and 103. ManGS. 
2, 18, 2 has the first stanra, together with 11 other verses, used to accompany 
12 offerings which me intended to produce pregnancy. Cf. also Jolly, Mcdiein, 
p. 58 f. An interesting parallel is SVidli. 2, 2. 1 alha yasytijottuti pramlymm ... 

3, Cf. Meyer's note 72 (p. 50). 

*1. Triple amulets arc repeatedly mentioned; AlUV, 5, 28, e.g., is used with an 
amulet of three metals (ef. st. 2; 4), which combine their powers. Cf. also 
such texts as Maun 2, *12 (t, girdle). — For the rite compare SVidli. 2, 2, 1. 

8 



114 


with ten thousand Savitri-stanzas and, (being poured over) with 
ten thousand (portions of the) remnants, praised with the text 
“Brahma 

18. 1. And afterwards this (sukta) shall be muttered together with the 

Savitri — this is really a consecration — and with all benedictions 
(svastyayana-). 

2. The woman, when pregnant, shall, duly prepared for the solemn 
rite, carry the amulet, after it has been poured over, on her head; 
in the third month of her pregnancy she shall fasten the amulet (to 
her body). 

3. When she has the menses, the woman shall for a year keep in the 
condition of a cow which has a calf, with much to be drunk and 
eaten, together with the sucking little one. 

4. When a boy has been born she shall fasten the jewel (amulet) to 
his neck. As to the remainder of the clarified butter, she shall (first) 
anoint the little boy (with it). — 

5. A woman who has sacrificed with the benedictions brings a male 
child into the world. After a year the benediction is performed 
again. — 

19. 1. Before the breast is given one shall have him (the boy) drink with 

(whilst muttering) the sraddliasilkta- (sukta of Faith), and with the 
medhasukta- (sukta of Intelligence) (one shall have) him (eat) a 
cam (a dish usually presented to the gods etc.) consisting of rice 
which has been ground, 

2. mixed with honey, brilliant (like gold) : by these means (the child) 
becomes intelligent. He shall live a hundred years and not die before 
(the completion of) a full life. 

3. And he will have (the function of) memory after six months after 
that. — After having prepared, in a ritual way, clarified butter a 
twice-born man shall sacrifice (it) with the (sukta) “From your 
eyes”, 

18. 3. Instead of : “when . . . menses” Meyer (p. 50) proposes : “when she brings 

forth”. Although sarad- “autumn”, when meaning “year” is mostly used in 
the plural, it seems to have this sense here. — “To be eaten”: the text has 
yovascr- which means “fodder”. — "Little one”: vatsa- "calf” can also be 
applied to a child. 

19. 1. Cf. IV, 13, 5; 14, 1. — See Hillebrandt, Rituall. § 14: before the breast is 

given, the new child must undergo the “vivifying” ( dyitsya -) and "(first 
feeding” ( prasam -) ceremonies as well as the medhajamna - which produces 
intellectual vigour etc.; according to several authorities both ceremonies or 
one of the two imply eating or drinking. 



115 


4. and then he shall touch his head with a hand which is anointed with 
ghee, and his ears, his eyes, his chin and nose, he shall touch (them) 
also, 

5. whilst constantly muttering this very (sukta) : (by doing so) he is 
freed from consumption. (Or) he shall undertake to destroy con- 
sumption in accordance with the ritual prescript which has been 
mentioned before. 

1 1. He may also undertake to destroy consumption with a burnt-offering 

and with mutterings. — A pure (man) shall mutter the sukta “Go 
away” which destroys (the) evil (consequences of) dreams. • — 

2. With the sukta (beginning with) “ O gods, the pigeon” one shall, 
should a dove alight, pour sacrificial butter into the fire; for they 
consider him to be a messenger (minister) of Yama. 

3. One shall pronounce (the sukta of) the bull, which is destructive of 
rivals, on the occasion of a performance of mutterings and burnt- 
offerings. — (The sukta) “By which this shall constantly be 
muttered by (a man) who is regular in observances : 

3. “From your eyes”: RV. 16, 163, which, according to BD. 8, 66 and the 
Anukr., is “destructive of consumption” (yaksmandsanam, cf. IV, 19, 5). The 
sukta which, with variations, corresponds to most of AthV. 2, 33, mainly 
consists of a catalogue of names of parts of the body from which the exorcist 
in an anticipatory way boasts of being able to expel the yaksma. For its use 
see also Whitney-Lanman, ox., p. 76. AthVPar. 32, 9 classes it in a group 
of formulas promoting longevity and prescribes it in the ghrtakambala 
ceremony which effects freedom from all kinds of diseases and demons as 
well as the attainment of the world of Brahma (33, 6, 4). 

4. Before: probably IV, 16, 5. 

0 I. RV. 10, 164 is referred to. BD. 8, 67 and the Anukr. concur in the view 
that it is destructive of (the consequences of) evil dreams. 

2. “O gods, the pigeon” ; RV. 10, 165. BD. 8, 67 ft. relates the following 
tradition: A sage, Kapota Nairrta (“Pigeon, relating to Nirrti, (the goddess 
of) destruction”) practising austerity, a pigeon placed its food on his fire- 
receptacle in the forest; then, the rsi praised the bird in wxrds propitious to 
himself with RV. 10, 165, which is said to have the object of expiation 
{frayascitta -). Part of the sukta is AthV. 6, 27 which is used by KausS. 46, 7 
against birds of ill omen. See also AsvGS. 3, 7, 7; Qahkh. GS. 5, 5, If.; 
ManGS. 2, 17, 1 prescribes this kapotasukta in various cases in winch the 
marks of doves' claws is seen ; see also KathakaGS. 56, 1. For the pigeon as 
an ominous bird see D. J. Kohlbrugge, Atharvaveda-Parisista fiber Omina, 
Thesis Utrecht 1938, p. 121 ft. — Messenger of Death (yamaduta -) : the same 
name is given to this bird by the commentator on KathakaGS., l.c. ; see also 
M. J. Dresden, Manavagrhyasutra, Thesis Utrecht 1941, p. 170. 

3. SB. 8, 69 similarly states that the sukta beginning with “a bull” (i.e. RV. 10, 
166) is destructive of rivals. See also IV, 25, 1, where this sukta is also 
designated as “rival-killing”. The Anukr. calls it a means of destroying 
enemies. Cf. st. 1 “make me a killer of enemies”, 2 “I am a killer of rivals” 


116 


4. by that he gains concentration of the mind and is not confused, * — 
On the occasion of a benediction for cows one shall mutter (the 
sukta) “Refreshing the wind” : 

5. Concentrated, one shall, further, in the midst of the cow-pen, pour 
out into the fire made of dung, barley-corns which have been 
anointed with ghee and ritually prepared by means of coagulated 
milk, honey and clarified butter. - — 

21. 1. One shall anoint a king under Pusya or Sravana, or also under the 

(naksatras) presided over by Pusan (Revati), Savitr (Hasta), Soma 
(Mrgasiras), the Asvins (Asvini) (respectively), under Rohini and 
the Uttaras. 

2. After having sacrificed in the fire with (these stanzas characterized 
by their being) destined for kings, with the Savitrl, duly prepared 
for the rite, pure, one must, moreover, be poured over with the 
remnants (of the oblation) with (i.e. whilst muttering) the great 
vyahrtis’. 


etc. AsvGS. 2, 6, 13 uses it for a man who, going- home, approaches (attacks) 
his rival (Haradatta’s commentary ; Stenzler’s translation, p. 78 is not correct). 
— “By which this” : the text refers to a khila of 13 stanzas preceding RV. 10, 
167. See Scheftelowitz, p. 127 ff. ; RgVeda S. K., IV, p. 970 iT. (no. 4, 11); 
Macdonell, BD., II, p. 312. BD. 8, 69 and the Anukr. relate that this siikta 
is “addressed to Mind” (maiiasctr)” ; Agni Pur. 259, 74, like RVidh., speaks 
of samadhim manasah. According to Manu 11, 251 even he who has stolen 
gold becomes free from guilt if he mutters this text and a definite other 
sukta. — The refrain of this sukta reads like this : “Let the mind (which . . 
by which . . . etc.) be auspicious in intention”. 

4. RV. 10, 169, beginning with “Refreshing . . and addressed to the Cows 
(Anukr.), “various kinds of milch kine are there praised” (BD. 8, 72). The 
text invokes protection and blessings for the cows. See AsvGS. 2, 10, 5 ff., 
where RV. 10, 169, 1 and 2 are prescribed as a consecratory text for cows 
leaving their stable for the pastures (Comm.). 

21 1-5. The text probably refers to both RV. 10, 173 and 174, which are designated 

by the Anukr. as “praise of a king” and regarded by BD. 8, 73 as “two hymns 
for consecrating a king who has been anointed”. Sayana, Introd. to 10, 173 
speaks of a “praise of an anointed king”, adding that the domestic priest 
must consecrate a king who prepares for battle with this sukta (and the 
following). Compare also AsvGS. 3, 12, 2, and AthVPar. 5, being a description 
of the lustration performed for a king under the naksatra Pusya. RV. 10, 173, 
1-5 are AthV. 6, 87 and 88, 1-2, which are meant to establish a man in 
sovereignty, while 10, 174, 1; 2; 3; 5 correspond respectively with AthV. 1, 
29, 1; 2; 3; 6, which form part of a text used to bring about a chief's success. 
AV. 6, 87 and 88 are prescribed by Kaus. in various rites (see Whitney- 
Lanman, p. 345) which often aim at bringing about fixity or steadiness; 

. AV. 1, 29 is used by the same in the ceremony of the restoration of a king 
with preparing and binding on an amulet made of the rim of a chariot-wheel 
(KausS. 16, 29). Moreover, KausS. 140, 8 and AthVPar. 19, 1, 7 have AV. 6, 



117 


3. Then one shall anoint him, when he (i.e. the person destined for 
kingship) is seated, on his throne, on the skin of a tiger, with the 
smooth juices of all sorts of herbs and with water taken from rivers, 

4. and, next, standing and turning to the west, one shall pronounce 
(the following formulas): “Conquer you this earth I Let your 
dharma (Law and (religious merit resulting from) the observance 
of prescribed rules of conduct, etc.) increase in all respects, O 
king! Protect your subjects !” 

5. Prosper unto good fortune, opulence, triumph, and happiness ! Let 
there be kings in your family !” Thereupon one shall mutter (the 
text of) Apratiratha. 

,2. 1. And the skin shall come from a tiger, the fuel from the udumbara. 

When one has thus sprinkled (anointed) him thrice one shall conse- 
crate the kettle-drums : 

2. “Let the Vasus anoint you in the eastern quarter in order to obtain 
tejas (energy, prestige, splendour) 1 Let the Rudras anoint you in 
the southern quarter with a view of welfare (success) ! 

87 used on the occasion of an Indramahotsava (Indra’s festival). I also refer 
to the parallel text SVidh. 3, 5. — Tisya and Qravana are two naksatras, 
being also called Pusya and Crona respectively. Naksatras, the so-called 
‘lunar mansions' are 27 (later 28) asterisms or constellations through which 
the moon passes ; see W. Kirfel, Die Kosmographie der Inder, Bonn-Leipzig 
1920, p. 36 fr, and 138 ft. — “The Uttaras” is a name of those naksatras the 
name of which contains the word uttara- “following, posterior”: Uttcrra- 
bhadrapdda, Uttaraphalguni, Uttarasadha. — The ‘great vyahrtis’, i.e. the 
formula bhur blutvah svah. See I, 3, 4. 

3. A tiger-skin is, like the royal throne (see J. Auboyer, Le trone et son sym- 
bolisme dans lTnde ancienne, Paris 1949, p. 175 ff.), which is placed over the 
skin (see £Br. 5, 4, 4 r 1, and compare A Weber, Uher die Konigsweihe, Abh. 
Akad. d. Wiss. Berlin 1893, p. 62; ill), a neccessary implement in conferring 
sovereignty upon a man (see also Keith, RPh. p. 340 if.). The skin of a tiger 
confers the power of the king of animals, i.e. royal power on him (cf. also 
AthV. 4, 8, 4). — Rivers : cf. Weber, o.c., p. 33 f. 

4. The king is facing the east: cf. Weber, o.c., p, 49. — ‘One': the domestic 
priest. 

5. I e. BY. 10, 103 ; see above (IV, 2, 1). 

^ 1. W hen being anointed the king is seated on a throne which, according to 

some authorities is made of wood of the udumbara (udumbara), the Ficus 
glomerata which is supposed to represent abundance of thriving. — Texts 
and rites for consecrating large kettle-drums (dundttbhi-) for the sake of 
success in war are included in AthV. and KausS. 

2. Compare AsvGS. 1, 24, 15-18, where formulas reading like this: “Let the 
Vasus eat (consume) you with the Gayatrl metre” etc., are used during the 
ceremonious reception of a guest, and many similar passages (see Vedic Cone. 
847 f.) in other texts, e.g. PB. 6, 6, 7;"TS. 4, 1, 5, 3; AitBr. 8, 19, 1; 
ApCrS. 16, 4, 5 etc. 


118 


3. Let the Adityas anoint you in the western quarter in order to obtain 
opulence (prosperity) ! Let the All-gods anoint (you) in the northern 
quarter in order to obtain happiness (bliss) ! 

4. After having consecrated the king by sprinkling and after having 
hailed him with benedictions one shall, further, address him with 
the mantra (sacred text); “ I have brought thee near; be thou 
within”. — 

5. One shall regularly mutter (the sukta beginning with) “The flying 
(animal)” as a means to destroy spiritual ignorance. It is a destroyer 
of maya and invalidates (repels) all kinds of magic illusions and 
contrivances. 

23. 1. With this (sukta) one will be able to ward off (stop) magic such 

as that of the sarnban - (“sorcery”) description or the indrajala - 
(“illusion”) type. And by means of this (sukta) one repels the 'magic' 
(illusion) coming from invisible beings. — 

2. “Forthwith this” is a text to be recited for good luck and prosperity 
(svastyayana) which one should mutter (if one is) constant in the 
observance of vows. — If a (woman), who is in the prime of life 
though she has seen (has experience of) the menstrual flux, does 
not conceive, 

3. she shall, after touching her female organs, mutter (the texts begin- 
ning with) “Visnu (the) womb” and “Nejamesa”. — Let the great 

4. The words quoted form the first quarter of the first stanza of RV. 10, 173. 

5. The sukta beginning with patangom (the “flying (animal)” often explained 
as “bird” and according to Sayana referring to the sun), i.e. RV. 10, 177, 
is described by the Anukr. and BIX 8, 75 as mayabhcda i.e. destructive of 
that supernormal power which is especially apt to create illusion. The reputed 
rsi of the sukta is Patariga Prajapatya. The text, the first line of which 
reads like this : “The bird anointed by the maya of the asura” is repeatedly 
used in the ritual. If maya is given the (Vedantic) philosophical sense 
(“world-mirage”) the sukta can be considered destructive of ajnana- (“the 
ignorance which impedes man’s seeing and realizing Truth”). 

23 1. Qambara was, in the RV., a demon dwelling in the mountains and having 

many forts, who is called indy in- “practiser of illusion and other super- 
normal power” (see e.g. RV. 1, 54, 4) : hence sambarl- “sorcery and so on”. 
— Indrajala - (“Indra’s net”, by which the god encircles his enemies with 
darkness, cf. AthV. 8, 8, 7 ff.) also means “(the art of) magic”. 

2. “Forthwith this” are the first words of RV. 10, 178, the first verse of which 
= AthV. 7, 85. BD. 8, 77, AthVPar. 32, 11 (and the commentary on KausS. 
25, 36) concur in the view that it is a svastyayana. The 1st stanza invokes 
Tark$ya, the god-impelled divine steed, which in other Vedic and later texts 
is referred to as a bird and in the Epic is identical with Garuda. He was 
probably connected with the sun (See Macdonell, VM., p. 149). Stanza 2 and 
3 praise' T. — For further information sec Sayana’s introduction to RV. 
10, 178. 



119 


y 


aid of the three be”, (this text) shall be muttered for the sake of 
auspicious progress. 

4. One shall mutter (the sukta) “Forth for Agni”, (which is) an enemy 
of the hostile ones’, as a means to remove enmity. — (The sukta) 
“Hither this bull”, (to wit the verses) relating to Sarparajni — by 
(muttering) this one wards off snakes. 

3. "Visnu (the) womb” RV. 10, 184. According to BD. 8, 82 f. this text 
contains prayers uttered by the reputed rsi (who was, according to the 
Anukr., Tvastr Garbhakartr) with a view to his wife's (obtaining) offspring. 
Hence the Sarvanukramani calls it a garbhartMsih "a prayer for a child”. 
In some sutra-texts its verses are used at the first cohabitation; Manava 
GS. 2, 18, 2 prescribes it in the so-called rite of the six oblations which 
should be performed by a person who longs for sons ; AthV. has it (5, 25, 5) 
among other verses promotive of successful conception, quoted by KausS. 
35, 5 in a rite for male conception. The text contains such injunctions as 
‘Let Visnu prepare the womb, let Tvastr (the divine shaper of forms) frame 
the shape (of the„ child) ; create offspring, O Simvali (a goddess implored 
to grant children)”. — "Nejamesa”: the text refers to the khila of 3 stanzas, 
coming before RV. 10, 185 in the Kashmir collection of khilas (4, ;13; 
Scheftelowitz, p. 130; RV. ed. SK. IV, p. 974), and mentioned by BD. 8, 83 
as optional with a view to offspring. It is prescribed, along with 5 other 
stanzas, in the ritual during pregnancy (e.g. AsvGS. 1, 14, 3; Manava GS. 
2, 18, 4 has it used in the Nejamesa-ceremony which is to be performed, if 
no success has been attained by the "rite of the six oblations”. Nejamesa, 
who is a more or less enigmatic figure (see Dresden, Manavagrhyasutra, 
Thesis Utrecht 1941, p. 174), is in those stanzas requested to “fly back 
with good sons, to create offspring to be born in the tenth month, to create 
a male son in this womb(?) of the woman”. See also BD. 8, 84 f. and 
Macdonell’s remarks. — ”Let the great aid of the three be”: RV. 10, 185, 
the so-called Mahitra-sukta, which is considered as praising the Adityas, 
Varuna, Aryaman and Mitra (BD. 8, 86), is intended for appeasement of 
evil influences (santi) and purification (BD. 8, 87; cf. Manu 11, 249); it 
is, however, also considered as a svastyayana (Sarvanukr., BD. ibid.), 
especially in case of a guru (spiritual guide and teacher) saying farewell 
to a pupil (cf. AsvGS. 3, 10, 7 f ., and Sayana’s introd. to RV. 10, 185) : 
cf . st. 2 of the sukta : “the wicked enemy has no hold over them on their 
travels”. 

4. "Forth for Agni” : RV. 10, 187, addressed to Agni (cf. also BD. 8, 88). 
Except for the order of two stanzas, it is also an AthV. text : 6, 34 ; 
KausS. 31, 4 prescribes it in a remedial rite against demons; similarly 
AthVPar. 32, 3 The refrain of all (5) stanzas is "may he (Agni) pass us 
over our haters”. Compare also I, 19, 4. — “Hither this bull” : the difficult 
sukta RV. 10, 189 which is also found or quoted in many other texts, is 
referred to. It describes the rising of a heavenly body, called a spotted bull, 
moving between the shining spaces and ruling over thirty domains. For its 
ritual use see Whitney-Lanman, p. 303. According to the Anukr. Sarparajni 
is the ‘sage’, and she herself or Surya (the Sun) the divinity of the sukta. 
The name Sarparajni, which is also mentioned BD. 8, 89 (see also 90 f.), 
meaning "relating to, coming from Sarparajni “the Serpent-queen”,, and 
the stanzas of this sukta, which are called sarparajnyah , being connected 



120 


5. One shall mutter the “sin-effacing” (sukta) as most eminent means 
of purification. And whatever well-concentrated man recites it three 
times after entering water, 

24. 1. is like (one who has performed) the purificatory bath (of the 

sacrificer, etc.) after a horse-sacrifice: Manu has expressed himself 
to that effect. One shall recite the ‘sin-effacing’ text three times after 
having plunged into water. 

2. Like the purificatory bath after a horse-sacrifice: the rsi said it 
like this: “As the horse-sacrifice, the king of sacrifices, removes 
all evil (sin) 

3. even so the ‘sin-effacing’ (aghamarsana-) sukta removes all evil (sin). 
— Saunaka (holds) that (the sukta beginning with) “Of the handless” 
may be (considered) a means of scattering an (hostile) army. 

4. The sage Saunaka is of the opinion that one must meditate on it in 
thought. — The sukta (beginning with) “Together together Thou 
unitest, O manly one” is a great means of effecting fraternity. 

with the rejuvenation of the snakes (see Caland, Das Qrautasutra des 
Apastamba, Gottingen-Leipzig, 1921, p. 150, ad Ap£S. 5, 12, lb: “Nach 
TS. 1, 5, 4, 1 wurden diese Spriiche von Kasarnira, dem Sohn der Kadrii 
(the mythical mother of all snakes), “gesehen” und infolgedessen verjiingten 
sich die Schlangen, sich die Haut abstreifend”), their ritual use in RVidh. 
becomes, in some degree, clear. We may also remember that the sun-bird 
is the enemy of the snakes (see e.g, Hopkins, Epic Mythology, p. 203 
and 21 ff.). 

5. As we have seen (I, 3, 5; cf. 11, 4; 12, 1), the name aghamarsanam “sin- 
effacing'’ refers to RV. 10,190, “to which no superior exists for appeasement 
of evil or purification: like the horse sacrifice, the chief of offerings, the 
sin-effacing brahma (“sacred text”) removes every pollution” (BD. 8, 91 ff.). 
The reputed seer is Aghamarsana and the contents are held to be “evolu- 
tional” (see above, IV, 9, 2); they, indeed, bear upon cosmogony. 

24. 1-3. Manu: the words quoted are found Manu 11, 260, which is essentially 
identical with BD. 8, 92 11-93 I. — Cf. also III, 4, 4. — “Purificatory 
bath”; avabhrtha - see, e.g., Keith, RPh., p. 303 f. 

3. The sukta “Of the handless” (the text: nalrhasiyam saiadaranam etc.) is 
a khila (5, 2; Scheftelowitz, p, 133; RV. ed. p. 977), the contents of which 
essentially agree with some parts of AthV. 6, 66 and 67, which are clearly 
intended to bring about success in battle and, accordingly, prescribed by 
Kaus. (14, 7) in a rite for victory over enemies: “Handless be the enemies; 
we cause their arms to shrink; of you, burnt by Agni, let Indra slay each 
best man . . — £aunaka : I, 1, 2. 

4. “Together, together”: IJV. 10, 191 described by BD. 8, 97 as the best text 
for conciliation, by the Anukr. as a samjhanam “(a text) for producing 
unanimity”. In a similar way Sayana’s introduction to the sukta. It is 
also found in the AthV., the 1st stanza being 6, 63, 4 and 2-4 6, 64. With 
AthV. 6, 63, 1-3 the contents of these stanzas have nothing to do (the 
Paippalada text does not combine them); AthV. 6, 64 is a text to bring 
about concord; see H. Oldenberg, Die Hymnen des RV. I, 244 f and 



121 


5. One shall apply it in case of dissension among relatives : (then) they 
never become disunited. But when dissension has been brought about 
(is a fact) one shall mutter this text for producing unanimity as a 
means of effecting reconciliation. 

6. There dissension will be (found) no more, where one perpetually 
mutters this (text). — “That happiness and welfare we choose”, — 
one shall mutter (this text) as a benediction (. svastyayana -). 

L (The stanzas called) “The Great-named ones” are the highest 
brahma, the spotlessly bright light, the eternal. The verses relating 
to the clarifying soma are traditionally held to be the highest (?), 
they destroy rivals and are auspicious. 

2. He who is desirous of rain shall, further, mutter the primeval 
verses characterized by the words “O Waters, ye are”. ■ — The 

Whitney-Lanman, p. 329. The text which (as Ath. 6, 64) is prescribed by 
Kaus. (12, 5) in a ceremony for harmony, contains several words like “do 
ye coricur ; be ye closely combined ; let (your minds) be concurrent ; let (the 
intent, counsel etc.) be alike, the same etc.”. 

5. “Unanimity” : the khila 5, 1 of the Kashmir collection (Scheftelowitz, p. 132 ; 
RV. ed. SK., p. 976), which is, according to BD. 8, 97 likewise the best 
text for conciliation. Although in the khila collection it comes before the 
khila nairhastyam, BD. and RVidh. agree in putting it after RV. 10, 191. 
I also refer to Macdonell’s remarks, BD. II, p. 320. 

GahkhQrS. 3, 6, 3 the text is used during the samjnanesti (a rite for pro- 
ducing unanimity). It contains the word “unanimity” 7 times, and is also 
otherwise fit for this ritual use, cf. e.g., st. 2 “grant us unanimity”. 

6. Stanza 7 of khila 5, 3 (Scheftelowitz, p, 134) c= 5 of the above khila is 

referred to, which is used separately in several texts (see Scheftelowitz, 

p 132). It reads like this : “That happiness and welfare we choose, success 
to the sacrifice, success to the sacrificer, let there be divine welfare for 
us, welfare for (our) men. Let the remedy go up, let there be happiness 
for our two-footed ones, happiness for our four-footed ones”. 

1. Mahandmnyah “the great-named ones” is the name of a series of verses 

beginning with vida maghavan, to be found as RV. khila 5, 4 (Scheftelowitz, 

p. 134; RV. ed. SK IV, p, 978), SamaVeda Naigeyasakha, at the end of the 
Purvarcika (see Scheftelowitz, p. 135) and AftAr. 4, 1, 1 (see A. B. Keith, 
The Ait Ar., Oxford 1909, p. 258 ff ), They are often quoted, and in BD. 
(cf 8, 98 ff ) immediately follow khila 5, 1 (last stanza “That happiness 
and welfare”); in RVidh. and the Kashmir khila collection they likewise 
join this stanza. Cf also Oldenberg, Prol., p 509 f. According to BD. 8, 98 
these stanzas arc “mystical" (guhya-) t “whoever repeats them obtains a day 
of Brahma which lasts for a thousand years”. SVidh. 1, 4, 12 says that 
they together, with other stanzas form the so-called Amrta Samhita by 
which the gods obtained 'immortality*. — St. 6 and 7 of this khila Indra 
is invoked “to convey us beyond our enemies”. 1 II and 2 I are probably 
inserted. The first line, in which Meyer (p 50, n. 114) proposed jnira 
instead of para, seems to refer to the suktas of the clarifying soma (see 
above, II, 35, 7), the second refers to RV. 10, 9 (see above, III, 4, 3 ff.). 
The lines may represent an additional note. 



122 


vyahrtis preceded by the sacred syllable Om, the suktas of 
Madhuchandas 

3. at the beginning, at the end the “Great-named ones” — that is 
traditionally held to be the “Immortal collection” (Amrta Samhita). 
By means of this (methodically arranged) collection (of texts) the 
gods in former times became ‘immortal 2 * 4 5 6 * * * * 11 . 

4. He who, (being) pure, regularly mutters this (collection) becomes 
‘immortal 5 . In the very middle one shall in great number insert the 
suktas to be addressed to the forefathers, 

5. one should consider this as the collection relating to the fathers : 
one pleases (propitiates) the fathers with it. By abridging in the 
same way the collection relating to the Vasus (Vasava Samhita) is 
called into existence, 

6. a Raudra, Aditya and Vaisvadevi collection, or one relating to 
whichever divinity one desires. — A man who knows the dharma 
shall perform a purificatory ceremony on completing the erection 
of a house (vastusamana-) in the midst of the cow-pen. 

26. 1. He shall scatter flowers, perfumes and garlands, fruits of trees and 

also herbs on the whole site of the house, and in the same way the 
seven kinds of grain. 

2. And he shall there worship the Lord of the site, Brhaspati, with rice 
boiled in milk, and, then, with fruits of the udumbara and the palasa 
present a bali in every quarter. 

2. Vyahrtis: see above, I, 3, 4. 

2-3. Madhuchandas is the reputed rsi of RV. 1, 1-10 and 9, 1. A similar, but 
not identical Amrta Samhita is mentioned SamaVidh. 1, 4, 12-13; see 
also S. Konow, Das Samavidhanabrahmana, p. 19 ff. 

4. Cf. SVidh. 1, 4, 13. — The “suktas of the forefathers” are doubtless similar 

collections; a pitrya samhita is mentioned SVidh. 1, 4, 20. 

6. A raudrl samhita and similar collections are mentioned SVidh. 1, 4, 16 ff. ; 

they satisfy Rudra etc. — For the vastusamana-, the purificatory ceremony 

performed on completing the erection of a house or on entering a new 

house see SVidh. 3, 3, S ; and, in general Hillebrandt, RitualL p. 80 f,, and 
Keith, RPh. p. 363 f.; see also M. Bloomfield, in JAOS. 16, p. 12 f. 

See for this offering to the Lord of the site HirGS. 1, 2 7 and ManGS. 2, 

11, 19. Compare also O. StrauB, Brhaspati im Veda, Thesis Kiel, 
Leipzig 1905. 

26. 1. Read: saptadlianyais. BArUp. 6, 3, 13 enumerates ten cultivated kinds of 

grain: rice, barley, sesamum, beans, millet, panick, wheat, lentils, pulse, and 
vetches the first six names in pairs forming compounds. 

2. Brhaspaii - is like Brahma, a personal ‘conception’ of the power going by 
the name of brahma which is occasionally mentioned together with 
Vastospati (cf. II, 26, 43. See also Gonda, Brahman, p. 50. — A bali- is, 
as a rule, an offering of portions of food, such as rice etc., to gods, semi- 



123 


3. Surya (the Sun), Vayu (Wind), Yama, the Forefathers, Varuna 
and Nirrti (Destruction), Soma (the Moon) and the great Indra, 
these are the divinities who are traditionally held (v.l. : praised) as 
(residing) in the quarters of the sky. 

4. He shall give a donation to the brahmans : (in this way) prosperity 
will be in his dwelling-place. A man who performs his domestic 

^ rites must perform (this ceremony) in his house every year, 

5. and if this be so, any other (ritual) of the same kind, even if it has 
not been ordained. — Agni, Indra and also Vayu, Surya, and (the) 
other divinities, 

1. one should quickly approach that very (divinity), of whichsoever 
one endeavours to gain the favour, with a corresponding sukta, 
which has been divulged by means of (or : in) the mantras of 
the rsis, 

2. (with such an) application as has been enjoined (by the authorities) : 
(then) the success is regarded as instantaneous. One shall in every 
case give a daksina, (which may) even (consist in) movable property, 
for the sake of the accomplishment of the ritual act (and the com- 
plete attainment of its aims). 

3. “There is no ritual act whatever without a daksina ’ says Saunaka. 
(A donation presented) according to one's ability will, indeed, in 
the end (prove to) be like a full vessel in value. 

4. Therefore a daksina, even if it is a very small one, must be given 
for the sake of the accomplishment (and the complete success) of 
the ritual act. One shall give ten (cows) and a bull or that with 
which the guru is satisfied. 

divine beings, spirits, animals and other creatures; it is daily given before 
the meal by throwing the food outside the house or by placing it somewhere. 

3. The common list of the guardian deities who preside over the eight quarters 
and intermediate points of the sky (lokapalas) reads like this : Indra, east ; 
Agni, south-east; Yama, south; Surya (or Nirrti) south-west; Varuna, 
west; Vayu, north-west; Kubera, north; Soma, north-east. In the list of 
RVidh. Agni and Kubera are omitted; as Yama is the lord of the forefathers, 
the representatives of the S. and S.W. points appear twice. 

4. Every year: cf. HirGS. 1, 28, 2; cf. also GobhilaGS. 4, 7, 42 f. 

5. If this...: I divide: evain savidham. — Ordained: the word cniuktam , 
meaning "not mentioned (by the authorities), not ordained”, may also 
imply “unheard of, extraordinary”. — Compare Nirukta 7, 5. 

1-2. The punctuation given by Meyer would have us translate: “with a c. 
sukta, which... mantras, (which such an) a... enjoined by the rsis”, 

3. The donation presented to the officiating priest(s) is called a daksina. 

— A full vessel: i.e. as much as will fill a vessel, a vessel full of rice 
presented at a sacrifice to the officiating priest (s) ; to persons bringing good 
news, etc. a vessel filled with valuable things was sometimes distributed. 



124 


5. The gift of ‘sacred knowledge' (brahma) is given to a man who 
knows the dharma and speaks the truth ; this is the highest brahma, 
the mysterious supranormal means of purifying, 

6. One must neither give to one who is not composed, nor to one who 
is sonless and has not practised austerities ( tapas ), nor to one who 
did not live as a brahmacarin for a year (as a prayascitta -), nor to 
one who is not deserving to be taught, and unfit (noxious, hostile). 

Homage to Saunaka ! Homage to Saunaka ! 

V 

1. 1. To men who, destitute of good luck, do not know the Rgvidhana, 

the Rgveda, that tree of plenty, does not yield fruits. 

2. The Rgveda appears to me like an abode filled with precious stones ; 
without the lantern, to wit the Rgvidhana it(s splendour) does not 
become visible. 

3. Like a great ocean (a liberal mine of precious stones) the Rgveda 
is exceedingly difficult to cross (to get through) : without the great 
ship, to wit the Rgvidhana, it brings no profit. 

4. The Rgveda is a receptacle (or: hoard) of all precious stones, 
Brahman’s temple: with the methodical precepts for ritual acts of 
the Rgvidhana it is certainly obtained. 

5. Reciting the Rgveda remains fruitless for men without the 
Rgvidhana : therefore it must be studied with special effort. 

4. Ten cows and a bull: also Manu 11, 116; 130 and other texts. — Guru: 
The teacher and spiritual guide, who also conducts ceremonies and so on. 

5. Cf. Manu 4, 232, where brahmada - "a giver of the brahman i.e. of the 
Veda” is explained by the commentator Kulluka : “who teaches and expounds 
the Veda”. - Cf. Ill, 15, 2. 

6. Not composed : asanta-, see above, I, 15, 1 ; 22, 2. — Who has not lived as 
a brahmacarin (fasted and so on, see II, 2, 2; n. Ill, 21, 2): this seems to 
be the meaning of asamvatsarosita - (which elsewhere may express other 
meanings): cf. Var. BS. 46, IS, where the court priest, on perceiving an 
abnormal phenomenon in connection with an idol, has to worship it 
tryahositah etc. “after performing a three days' fast” (usita- e= it posit a-, cf. 
my paper “Quelques observations sur V emploi du verbe simple . . Acta 
Orientalia 20 (1948), p. 167 ff.). A year's living as a brahmacarin is 
repeatedly prescribed in the Dharma-books as a penance or atonement: see 
Gampert, o.c., Index, p. 270. — Not deserving . . . : cf., e.g., Mbh. 5, 33, 39 
asisyam sasti . The categories of persons who are asisya- are discussed in 
the Dharma-books (sudras etc.): see Gampert, ox., Index, p. 278, and, 
especially, p. 155 f. 

V 

1. 1. Tree of plenty: kalpavrksa mythical and celestial tree considered to fulfil 

all desires. See Hopkins, EM. p. 267 s.v. Tree. 



125 


L Who understands the Rgvidhana, the account of the exact meaning 
of the suktas, for him the mind of the Rgveda is full-blown, because 
of the serenity and kindness of its disposition. 

2. Acting in conformity with the Rgvidhana is conducive to a long life, 
the root of good fortune, a means of destroying all kinds of stains, 
and highly productive of splendid fame. 

3. In the twice-born man who knows the Rgveda joined together with 
the Rgvidhana dharma, artha, kama, and moksa will certainly be 
inherent (received). 

4. Among the Vedas the first Veda, the receptacle of the Ayurveda, 
the powerful, is excessively satisfied in consequence of the perpetual 
study of the Rgvidhana. 

5. The Rgveda, gratified by the Rgvidhana, will continually bring 
(about) destruction of enemies, satisfaction of mind, union with 
friends. 

1. Of (that man) who knows the Rgveda with all its angas and is 
always intent upon the Rgvidhana, all endeavours will be successful, 
even beyond his wishes. 

2. In consequence of a thorough knowledge of the Rgvidhana people 
have command of successfulness with regard to their family, birth, 
or way of living and acting, and also with regard to their intelligence 
and diligence. 

3. All divinities are satisfied, the manifestations of might succeed (are 
complete), every distress of mind disappears of those who regularly 
recite the Rgveda. 

Homage to saunaka ! Homage to Saunaka ! 


1. I would prefer prasadotphxtUa 0 (Mss. AC). 

3. Dharma customary observance of social and religious duties, artha-: 
striving after utility and advantage; kama - (sexual) enjoyment (the three so- 
called duties). 

4. Ayurveda: the ‘science of health’ or medicine, considered to be revealed 
by Brahma, classed among sacred sciences and regarded as a supplement of 
the AtharvaVeda. See J Filliozat, Le doctrine classique de la medicine 
indienne, Paris 1949, ch. I. 

5. Bring : the exact reading is uncertain, the general meaning, however, per- 
fectly clear. 

1. The angas of the RV. are certain (classes of) works considered as auxiliary 
to the Veda, and dealing with phonetics, metre, grammar, explanation of 
difficult words, astronomy and ceremonial. 

2. Has command: for the meaning of usanti (cf. Meyer’s note 12, p. 50) I 
refer to the Rgvedic abhi-vas 