@text=Śatapathabrāhmaṇa
@dcs-id=394
@translator=Eggeling
@digitized-by=sacred-texts.com
@prepared-by=Oliver Hellwig
@language=English

1.3.2.1 Now the sacrifice is the man. The sacrifice is the man for the reason that the man spreads (performs) it; and that in being spread it is made of exactly the same extent as the man: this is the reason why the sacrifice is the man.
1.3.2.2 The guhû (spoon) further belongs to that (man-shaped sacrifice), and so does the upabhrit; and the dhruvâ 2 represents its trunk. Now it is from the trunk that all these limbs proceed, and for this reason the entire sacrifice proceeds from the dhruvâ.
1.3.2.3 The dipping-spoon (sruva, masc.) is no other than the breath. This breath passes through (or, goes to) all the limbs, and for that reason the dipping-spoon goes to all the offering-spoons (sruk, fem.).
1.3.2.4 That guhû further is to him no other than yonder sky, and the upabhrit this atmosphere, and the dhruvâ this same (earth). Now it is from this (earth) that all the worlds originate: and from the dhruvâ, therefore, the whole sacrifice proceeds.
1.3.2.5 The dipping-spoon then is no other than that blowing one (the wind); it is this that sweeps across all these worlds: and for that reason the sruva goes to all the offering-spoons.
1.3.2.6 Now when this sacrifice is being performed, it is performed for the gods, the seasons, and the metres (or sacred texts). To the gods belongs what sacrificial food there is, to wit, king Soma and the sacrificial cake: all this he takes, while announcing it with the formula, 'I take thee, agreeable to so and so!' for thus it becomes theirs.
1.3.2.7 And whatever oblations of butter are taken, they are taken for the seasons and the metres. Every one of them he takes in the form of butter without announcing it (to any particular deity). In the guhû he takes of it four times (with the sruva from the pot), in the upabhrit eight times.
1.3.2.8 Now when he takes of it four times (with the sruva) in the guhû, he takes it for the seasons, since he takes it for the fore-offerings 1, and the fore-offerings are the seasons: all this he takes in the form of butter without making any announcement, in order to avoid sameness; for if he were to take it with the formulas 'For Spring (I take) thee!' 'For Summer--thee!' he would commit (the fault of) a repetition 2: he therefore takes it in the form of butter without making any announcement.
1.3.2.9 When, on the other hand, he takes eight times (with the sruva) in the upabhrit, he takes it for the metres 3, since it is for the after-offerings 1 that he takes it; and the after-offerings are the metres: all this he takes in the form of butter without making any announcement, in order to avoid sameness; for were he to take it with the formulas 'For the Gâyatrî--thee!' 'For the Trishtubh--thee!' he would commit a repetition: he therefore takes it in the form of butter without making any announcement.
1.3.2.10 Again, when he takes four times (with the sruva) in the dhruvâ, he takes it for the whole sacrifice, and all this he takes in the form of butter without making any announcement. To whom indeed should he announce it, since he cuts it off for all the deities? He therefore takes it in the form of butter without making any announcement.
1.3.2.11 Now the sacrificer stands behind the guhû, and he who means evil to him stands behind the upabhrit. The eater stands behind the guhû, and what (or, he who) is to be eaten stands behind the upabhrit. And the guhû, indeed, is the eater, and the upabhrit is that which is to be eaten. In the guhû he takes four times (with the sruva), and in the upabhrit eight times.
1.3.2.12 Now when he takes four times (butter) in the guhû, he thereby makes the eater more limited, smaller; and when he takes eight times in the upabhrit, he makes that which is to be eaten more unlimited, more abundant: for a flourishing condition indeed exists where the eater is smaller and that which is to be eaten more abundant.
1.3.2.13 In taking four times in the guhû, he takes (altogether) more butter, and in taking eight times in the upabhrit he takes less butter.
1.3.2.14 For when, in taking four times (butter with the sruva) in the guhû, he takes more butter, he thereby, in making the eater more limited, smaller, imparts vigour and strength to him. And when, in taking eight times in the upabhrit, he takes less butter, he thereby, in making that which (or, him who) is to be eaten more unlimited, more abundant, makes it (or, him) vigourless and weaker. And thus a king who has established himself among a numberless people, subdues them even from a single dwelling, and takes possession of whatever he likes 1: with that very same energy (the Adhvaryu acts) when he takes a greater quantity of butter in the guhû. Now what he takes in the guhû, that he offers with the guhû; and what he takes in the upabhrit, that also he offers with the guhû.
1.3.2.15 And in reference to this point they say: 'Wherefore then is he to take it in the upabhrit, if he does not offer it with the upabhrit?' Now, if he were to offer it with the upabhrit, those subjects (of the king) would assuredly become separated from him, nor would there be either an eater or what is to be eaten. When, on the other hand, he pours (the butter) together and thus offers it with the guhû, thereby the people pay tribute to the Kshatriya. Hence by what he takes in the upabhrit, the Vaisya (man of the people), under the rule of the Kshatriya, becomes possessed of cattle; and when he pours (the butter) together and offers it with the guhû, thereby the Kshatriya, whenever he likes, says, 'Hallo Vaisya, just bring to me what thou hast stored away!' Thus he both subdues him and obtains possession of anything he wishes by dint of this very energy.
1.3.2.16 These butter-portions, then, are taken for the metres. Now what he takes in the guhû (by ladling) four times (with the sruva), that he takes for the gâyatrî; and what he takes in the upabhrit (by ladling) eight times, that he takes for the trishtubh and gagatî; and what he takes in the dhruvâ (by ladling) four times, that he takes for the anushtubh. For the anushtubh is speech, and from speech all this (universe) springs: hence it is from the dhruvâ that the whole sacrifice originates. The anushtubh also is this (earth), and from it all this (universe) originates: hence it is from the dhruvâ that the whole sacrifice originates.
1.3.2.17 He takes (butter with the sruva), with the text (Vâg. S. I, 31), 'Verily, thou art the favourite resort (or, dainty) of the gods!' He thereby makes that butter the most favourite resort of the gods: for this reason he says, 'verily, thou art the favourite resort of the gods!'--'An unassailable means of worship!' the butter is indeed a thunderbolt: therefore he says, 'an unassailable means of worship!'
1.3.2.18 Once he puts (butter with the sruva) into the guhû with this formula, three times silently. With the same formula he puts (butter) once into the upabhrit, seven times silently. With the same formula he puts once (butter) into the dhruvâ, three times silently. Now, as to this, they say, 'Thrice he should take with the formula in each case, for threefold is the sacrifice.' Nevertheless (it is done) only once with each (spoon), for it is just in this way that the taking thrice (with a formula) is accomplished.
1.3.3.1 The Adhvaryu takes the sprinkling-water, and sprinkles in the first place the fire-wood 1, with the text (Vâg. S. II, 1), 'A black deer, living in the den, art thou 1; I sprinkle thee, agreeable to Agni!' He thereby makes it sacrificially pure for Agni.

1.3.3.2 He then sprinkles he altar, with the text (Vâg. S. II, 1), 'Thou art the altar; I sprinkle thee, agreeable to the barhis (sacrificial-grass covering)!' He thereby makes it sacrificially pure for the grass covering.
1.3.3.3 He (the Âgnîdhra) then hands the sacrificial grass 2 to him (the Adhvaryu). The latter puts it down (on the altar) with the knot turned to the east, and sprinkles it, with the text (Vâg. S. II, I), 'Barhis art thou! I sprinkle thee, agreeable to the spoons!' He thereby makes it sacrificially pure for the spoons.

1.3.3.4 Thereupon he pours the sprinkling-water which is left on the roots of the (grass) plants, with the text (Vâg. S. II, 2), 'A moistening art thou for Aditi!' Aditi, indeed, is this earth; hence it is for the latter that he thus moistens the roots of the plants: thereby these plants become root-moistened; and even if their tops are dry, their roots at least remain moist.

1.3.3.5 Having thereupon untied the knot, he takes the prastara bunch from the front (of the barhis), with the text (Vâg. S. II, 2), 'Vishnu's crest art thou!' Vishnu, namely, is the sacrifice, and this (the prastara) is his top-knot or crest: this he thereby makes it at this sacrifice 1. From the front he takes it, because this top-knot also is (worn) on the front (of the head): for this reason he takes it from the front.

1.3.3.6 He then undoes the band (of the barhis). 'His (the sacrificer's) wife is sure to bring forth without difficulty 2,' thinking thus he undoes the band. He puts it down on the right hip (of the altar); for this represents his (the sacrificer's) waist-band, and it is on the right side that the waist-band is (tied): this is the reason why he puts it down on the right hip. He again covers it over (with sacrificial grass); for the waist-band also is covered (by the upper garment): for this reason he again covers it.

1.3.3.7 He now spreads the barhis (on the altar). For the prastara is the top-knot; and this other sacrificial grass is for this (sacrifice) what other hair there is below that (top-knot, viz. the beard, &c.):--that (hair) he thereby puts on it, and for this reason he spreads the barhis.

1.3.3.8 Now the altar (vedi, fem.) is a woman, and around her sit the gods and those priests who have studied and teach revealed lore 1; and as they thus sit around her, he makes her not naked: hence it is in order to avoid nudity (on her or the altar's part) that he spreads the barhis.

1.3.3.9 As large as the altar is, so large is the earth; and the plants (are represented by) the barhis; so that he thereby furnishes the earth with plants; and those plants are firmly established in this earth: for this reason he spreads the barhis.

1.3.3.10 Here now they say, 'Let him strew abundantly; for where the plants are most abundant on her, there the means of subsistence are most amply afforded by her: let him therefore strew abundantly!' It is in favour of him (the sacrificer) who procures (the sacrificial grass), then, (that this is done.) He strews it threefold, for threefold is the sacrifice. Or he may also spread it whilst lifting up (the tops); for it has been said by the seer (Vâg. S. VII, 32), 'They spread the barhis continuously.' He spreads it with the roots below (the tops); for it is with their roots below that those plants are firmly established in this earth: for this reason he spreads it with the roots below.

1.3.3.11 He spreads it, with the text (Vâg. S. II, 2), 'I spread thee, soft as wool, pleasant to sit upon for the gods!'--when he says 'thee, soft as wool,' he thereby means to say 'agreeable to the gods;' and by 'pleasant to sit upon for the gods,' he means to say 'forming a good seat for the gods.'

1.3.3.12 He now trims the fire. The Âhavanîya, doubtless, is the head of the sacrifice, for the head is the fore-part: that fore-part of the sacrifice he thereby trims. He trims it while holding the prastara (which he has received back from the Brahman) close over it; for the prastara is the top-knot, and it is this which he thereby puts on it: for this reason he trims (the fire) while holding the prastara close over it.

1.3.3.13 He then lays the (three) enclosing-sticks (paridhi) around (the fire). The reason why he lays the enclosing-sticks around (is this). When at first the gods chose Agni for the office of Hotri, he said: 'Verily, I am not equal to this, that I should be your Hotri, and that I should carry your oblation. Already you have chosen three before, and they have passed away. Restore them to me: then I shall be equal to this, that I should be your Hotri and that I should carry your oblation!' They said, 'So be it!' and they restored to him those (three former Agnis): they are these enclosing-sticks.

1.3.3.14 He then said, 'The thunderbolt, (in the shape of) the vashat-call 2, has struck these down: I am afraid of that thunderbolt, the vashat-call. Lest that thunderbolt, the vashat-call, should strike me down, enclose me by those (three Agnis, or paridhis); and thus that thunderbolt, the vashat-call, will not strike me down.' They said, 'So be it!' and they enclosed him with those (three sticks), and that thunderbolt, the vashat call, did not strike him down. When he encloses Agni with those (sticks) he buckles armour on him.

1.3.3.15 They (the other three Agnis) then said, 'If you join us with the sacrifice in this wise, then let us also have a share in the sacrifice!'

1.3.3.16 The gods said: 'So be it! What shall fall outside the enclosure, that is offered unto you; and what they shall offer just upon you, that will sate you; and what they shall offer up in the fire that will sate you!' Thus what they offer up in the fire, that satisfies them (the Agnis); and what they offer up just upon them (the enclosing-sticks, or Agnis), that satisfies them; and what is spilled outside the enclosure, that is offered to them: hence no sin attaches to what (butter) is spilt; for into this earth they entered (when they, the Agnis, passed away), and whatever is spilt here,--all that remains indeed in her.

1.3.3.17 That which is spilt he touches, with the formulas (Vâg. S. II, 2), 'To the Lord of the Earth--svâhâ!' 'To the Lord of the World--svâhâ!' 'To the Lord of Beings--svâhâ!' These, indeed, are the names of those Agnis,--to wit, Lord of the Earth, Lord of the World, and Lord of Beings. Thus in like manner as that (oblation) which is accompanied by 'Vashat' is offered up (to the particular deity to which it is announced), so is this (offered up) on his (the sacrificer's) part to those Agnis.

1.3.3.18 Here now some people take the sticks they lay around from the fire-wood; but let him not do so, for unsuitable for laying around are those which they take from the fire-wood, since the fire-wood is prepared for the purpose of being put upon (the fire); but what other (kind of sticks) they bring to him, called 'enclosing-sticks (paridhis),' they are indeed suitable for his purpose: let them therefore bring others.

1.3.3.19 Indeed, they should be of Palâsa wood (Butea Frondosa); for the Palâsa tree, doubtless, is the Brahman 1, and Agni also is the Brahman: for this reason the Agnis should be of Palâsa wood.

1.3.3.20 Should he be unable to procure them of Palâsa wood, they may be of Vikankata wood (Flacourtia Sapida); and if he be unable to procure any of Vikankata, they may be of Kârshmarya wood (Gmelina Arborea); and if he be unable to procure any of Kârshmarya wood, they may be of Vilva (Aegle Marmelos), or of Khadira (Acacia Catechu), or of Udumbara wood (Ficus Glomerata). These, doubtless, are the trees that are suitable for sacrificial purposes, and from these trees they (the enclosing-sticks) are therefore (taken).
1.3.4.1 They should be green (fresh); for that is (what constitutes) their living element, by that they are vigorous, by that possessed of strength: for this reason they should be green.
1.3.4.2 The middle stick he lays down first (on the west side of the fire), with the text (Vâg. S. II, 3), 'May the Gandharva Visvâvasu 2 lay thee around for the security of the All! Thou art a fence to the sacrificer, thou (art) Agni, invoked and worthy of invocation!'
1.3.4.3 He then lays down the southern one, with the text (ib.), 'Thou art Indra's arm for the security of the All! Thou art a fence to the sacrificer; thou Agni, invoked and worthy of invocation!'
1.3.4.4 He then lays down the northern one, with the text (ib.), 'May Mitra-Varuna lay thee around in the north with firm law for the security of the All! Thou art a fence to the sacrificer, thou Agni, invoked and worthy of invocation!' They are indeed Agnis, and for that reason he says, 'Agni, invoked and worthy of invocation!'

1.3.4.5 Thereupon he puts on (the fire) a samidh (kindling-stick). He first touches with it the middle enclosing-stick: thereby he first kindles those (three Agnis). After that he puts it on the fire: thereby he kindles the visible fire.

1.3.4.6 He puts it on, with the gâyatrî stanza (Vâg. S. II, 4), 'Thee, O Sage, who callest (the gods) to the feast, we will kindle so as to shine brilliantly; thee, O Agni, mighty at the sacrifice!' He thereby kindles the gâyatrî 2; the gâyatrî, when kindled, kindles the other metres; and the metres, when kindled, carry the sacrifice to the gods.

1.3.4.7 By the second kindling-stick (samidh), which he now puts on, he kindles the spring; the spring, when kindled, kindles the other seasons; and the seasons, when kindled, cause living beings to be produced and the plants to ripen. He puts it on, with the formula (Vâg. S. II, 5), 'A kindler (samidh) art thou!' for the spring is indeed a kindler.

1.3.4.8 When he has put it on, he murmurs (ib.), 'May the sun guard thee from the east against any imprecation!' for the enclosing-sticks serve for protection on all (the other three) sides; and thereby he makes the sun the protector on the east side, fearing 'lest the evil spirits, the Rakshas, should rush in from the east:' for the sun is the repeller of the evil spirits, the Rakshas.

1.3.4.9 By that third kindling-stick, then, which he puts on at the after-offerings, he kindles the officiating priest (brâhmana); and he, the priest, when kindled, carries the sacrifice to the gods.

1.3.4.10 He now returns to the altar covered (with sacrificial grass). Having taken two stalks of grass, he lays them down across (the barhis or grass covering, with the tops to the north), with the formula (Vâg. S. II, 5), 'Savitri's arms are ye!' The prastara bunch is indeed the top-knot (of the sacrifice); and he now lays down these two crosswise as its eye-brows: thereby these two (represent) the transverse eye-brows. The prastara, further, (represents) the kshatra (or military class); and the other barhis the vis (or, the common Âryan people);--(and the two stalks he puts down between them) for the sake of separating (vidhriti) the kshatra and the vis: for this reason he lays them down crosswise; and for this reason these two (stalks) are called vidhriti.

1.3.4.11 On them he spreads the prastara, with the formula (Vâg. S. II, 5), 'I spread thee, soft as wool, pleasant to sit upon for the gods!' When he says 'thee, soft as wool,' he means to say 'agreeable to the gods;' and by 'pleasant to sit upon for the gods' he means to say 'forming a good seat for the gods.'

1.3.4.12 He presses it down (with his left hand), with the text (ib.), 'May the Vasus, the Rudras, the Âdityas sit on thee!' These three, that is, the Vasus, the Rudras, and the Âdityas, namely, are (classes of) gods; and these, he means to say, are to sit down on it. While it is still being held down with his left hand,--

1.3.4.13 He seizes the guhû with his right, fearing 'lest the evil spirits, the Rakshas, should enter there in the meantime;' for the officiating priest (brâhmana) is the repeller of the Rakshas: therefore, while it (the prastara) is still being held down with his left hand,--

1.3.4.14 He seizes the guhû, with the text (Vâg. S. II, 6), 'Fond of butter art thou, Guhû by name!' for fond of butter indeed it is, and Guhû by name;--'Sit down here with the favourite resort (or dainty) on the favourite seat!' The upabhrit (he takes), with the formula (ib.), 'Fond of butter art thou, Upabhrit by name!' for fond of butter indeed it is, and Upabhrit by name;--'Sit down here with the favourite resort on the favourite seat!' The dhruvâ (he takes) with 'Fond of butter art thou, Dhruvâ by name!' for fond of butter indeed it is, and Dhruvâ by name;--'Sit down here with the favourite resort on the favourite seat!' What other sacrificial food there is, (he puts down on the prastara), with the formula, 'With the favourite resort sit down on the favourite seat!'

1.3.4.15 He lays the guhû down on (the prastara), and the other spoons down below, (viz. on the barhis, north of the guhû, and so as not to touch it or one another); for the guhû assuredly is the kshatra, and the other spoons (sruk) are the vis: he thereby makes the kshatra superior to the vis. Hence the people here serve, from a lower position, the Kshatriya seated above them: for this reason he places the guhû upon (the prastara) and the other spoons down below it.

1.3.4.16 He touches the offerings, with the text (Vâg. S. II, 6), 'Safely they have sat down,' for safely indeed they sat down;--'in the lap (yoni) of divine truth!' for the sacrifice is indeed the lap of divine truth, and in the sacrifice they sat down;--'Protect these, O Vishnu! protect the sacrifice! protect the lord of sacrifice!' thereby he refers to the sacrificer;--'Protect me, the leader of the sacrifice!' thereby he does not exclude himself either from the sacrifice. Vishnu, assuredly, is the sacrifice: hence it is to the sacrifice that he makes all that over for protection. This is the reason why he says, 'Protect these, O Vishnu!'

1.3.5.1 With the fire-wood (idhma, lighting material) the Adhvaryu lights (indh) the fire: hence it is called fire-wood. And with the kindling verses (sâmidhenî) the Hotri kindles (sam-indh, to make blaze): hence they are called kindling verses.

1.3.5.2 He (the Adhvaryu 1) says (to the Hotri): 'Recite to the fire as it is being kindled!' for it is to the fire, when it is being kindled, that he recites.

1.3.5.3 Here now some people say, 'O Hotar, recite to the fire as it is being kindled!' But let him not say so; for that (priest) is not a Hotri as yet; only when he (the sacrificer) elects him 2, does he become a Hotri. Let him therefore say, 'Recite to the fire as it is being kindled!'
1.3.5.4 He recites (verses) addressed to Agni: he accordingly kindles it (the fire) with the aid of its own deity. In the gâyatrî metre (are the verses which) he recites; for the gâyatrî is Agni's metre: by means of its own metre he thereby kindles it. The gâyatrî is vigour, the gâyatrî is the brahman 1 (the priestly order): with vigour he thereby kindles it.

1.3.5.5 Eleven (verses) he recites; for of eleven syllables consists the trishtubh metre. The gâyatrî is the brahman and the trishtubh is the kshatra (or military order) 2. With the aid of these two energies he thus kindles it: for this reason he recites eleven (verses).

1.3.5.6 Thrice he recites the first verse, and thrice the last one; for of threefold beginning are sacrifices, and of threefold termination: therefore he recites thrice the first and the last (verses).

1.3.5.7 Fifteen sâmidhenî verses result (from this repetition of the first and last of the eleven verses). The fifteen-versed chant 3, doubtless, is the thunderbolt, and the thunderbolt means strength; so that he thereby converts the sâmidhenîs into strength: hence, if he should hate any one, he may crush him with his great toes 1 at the time when those (verses) are recited. By saying, 'I here crush so and so!' he crushes him with that thunderbolt.

1.3.5.8 Fifteen nights indeed there are in a half-moon; and growing by half-moons the year passes: hence he thereby obtains the nights.

1.3.5.9 Now in the fifteen gâyatrî verses there are indeed three hundred and sixty syllables; and three hundred and sixty days there are in a year: hence he thereby obtains the days, he thereby obtains the year.

1.3.5.10 For an ishti (which is performed in order to obtain the fulfilment of a special wish) 3 let him recite seventeen sâmidhenî verses; for in a low voice he sacrifices to the deity to which he offers an ishti. Twelve months, namely, there are in a year, and five seasons 1: this (makes) the seventeenfold Pragâpati. For verily Pragâpati is all: hence for what wish he performs the ishti, that wish he thus accomplishes by means of the All. In a low voice he sacrifices to the deity; for what is spoken in a low voice is undefined (indistinct), and undefined is the 'All:' hence for whatever wish he performs the ishti, that wish he thus accomplishes by means of the All. This is the practice in regard to an ishti.

1.3.5.11 Some people say: 'Let him recite twenty-one sâmidhenî verses also at the full- and new-moon sacrifice.' Twelve, doubtless, are the months of the year, five the seasons, and three these worlds: this (makes) twenty; and the twenty-first is this very (sun) that here shines: he is the resort, he the stay; thereby he (the sacrificer) obtains this resort, this stay. He may therefore recite twenty-one.

1.3.5.12 Let him recite them only for one of established prosperity (gatasrî), who would not wish to become either better or worse. For, what he for whom they recite is like, like that he will either be or worse 2, for whom, that knows this, they recite those (twenty-one verses). This, however, is mere speculation, for those (twenty-one verses) are not recited 1.

1.3.5.13 Thrice he should recite the first and thrice the last (verse), without drawing breath; for three are these worlds, so that he thereby spreads (san-tan) these worlds, gains these worlds. Also three breaths there are in man: this recitation thereby causes him (the sacrificer) to be extended (santata), not cut short (by death).

1.3.5.14 He (the Hotri) should endeavour to recite this (uninterruptedly) as long as his strength lasts. If, on the other hand, he were to take breath in the middle (of the verse), it would be a slight on this very (sacrifice) 2: by reciting this (holy) composition without taking breath, that slight will be avoided.

1.3.5.15 If, however, he do not care to undertake this, he may also recite one (verse) at a time without drawing breath: he thereby spreads those worlds one by one, gains those worlds one by one. The reason why he takes breath, is that the gâyatrî is indeed breath; and that by reciting a complete gâyatrî verse, he accordingly bestows complete breathing (on the sacrificer): let him therefore recite one (verse) at a time without breathing.
1.3.5.16 He recites them in a continuous, uninterrupted way: thereby he makes the days and nights of the year continuous, and in a continuous, uninterrupted way revolve those days and nights of the year. And in this way he gives no access to the spiteful enemy; but access he would indeed give, if he were to recite them discontinuously: he therefore recites in a continuous, uninterrupted way.

f1.4.1.1 He recites after uttering (the syllable) 'Hiṅ!' Sacrifice, they say, is not (performed) without the Sâman; and neither is the Sâman chanted without 'Hiṅ' having been uttered. By his uttering 'Hiṅ!' the peculiar nature (rûpam) of the word 'Hiṅ' is produced (in the sacrifice); and by the sacred syllable (om) it assumes the nature of the Sâman. By uttering 'Om! Om 1!' this his entire sacrifice becomes endowed with the Sâman.
1.4.1.2 And (another reason) why he utters 'Hiṅ!' is this. The word 'Hiṅ' means breath, for the word Hiṅ' does indeed mean breath: he cannot therefore pronounce the word 'Hiṅ,' when he closes his nostrils. The rik (verse) he recites with his voice. Now, voice and breath are a pair, so that a productive union of the sâmidhenîs is thereby effected at the outset: for this reason he recites, after uttering 'Hiṅ!'

1.4.1.3 He utters the word 'Hiṅ' in a low voice. Were he, on the contrary, to pronounce 'Hiṅ' aloud, he would make 'voice' of both the one and the other: for this reason he utters the word 'Hiṅ' in a low voice.

1.4.1.4 He recites with 'â (hither)!' and 'pra (forth or thither) 1!' He thereby joins a gâyatrî verse directed hitherward to one directed away from here: the one which tends from hence carries the sacrifice to the gods, and the one which tends hitherward pleases the men. For this reason he recites with 'â' and 'pra.'

1.4.1.5 And (another reason) why he recites with 'â' and 'pra,' is this. 'Pra (forth)' clearly means out-breathing, and 'â (hither)' means in-breathing: hence he thereby obtains out-breathing and in-breathing (for the sacrificer). For this reason he recites with 'â' and 'pra.'
1.4.1.6 Yet (other reasons) why he recites with 'hither (â)' and 'thither (pra),' are these. 'Thither' the seed is cast, and 'hither' birth takes place. 'Thither' the cattle disperse (for grazing), 'hither' they return. Indeed, everything here (moves) 'hither' and 'thither:' for this reason he recites with 'â' and 'pra.'

1.4.1.7 He recites 1, 'Forth go your viands, heavenward!'-- hereby, then, the 'thither' is (realised). And (in the second verse), 'Come hither, Agni, to expand 1!'--by this, on the other hand, the 'hither' is (realised).

1.4.1.8 Now, in reference to this point, some people say, 'Both these (texts) surely result in a "thither 2."' This, however, is beyond the ordinary understanding: the text, 'forth go your viands, heavenward!' is clearly (directed) away from (the sacrificer); and the text, 'Come hither, Agni, to expand!' is (directed) towards (him).

1.4.1.9 He recites (the first kindling verse), 'Forth go your viands, heavenward!' this, then, tends in a forward direction. 'Viands' (vâga) 3 he says, because viands mean food: hence food is obtained (for the sacrificer) by this recitation. 'Heavenward' he says, because those that tend heavenward are the half-moons: it is, therefore, the half-moons which he obtains by this recitation. 'In havis rich' he further says, because those that are rich in havis (milk, butter) are the cattle; it is cattle, therefore, that he thereby obtains through the recitation.

1.4.1.10 'With buttered (spoon)--' he adds. Now Mâthava, the (king of) Videgha 1, carried Agni Vaisvânara in his mouth. The Rishi Gotama Râhûgana was his family priest. When addressed (by the latter), he made no answer to him, fearing lest Agni might fall from his mouth.

1.4.1.11 He (the priest) began to invoke the latter with verses of the Rig-veda, 'We kindle thee at the sacrifice, O wise Agni, thee the radiant, the mighty caller to the sacrificial feast (Rig-veda V, 26, 3)!--O Videgha!'
1.4.1.12 He (the king) did not answer. (The priest went on), 'Upwards, O Agni, dart thy brilliant, shining rays, thy flames, thy beams (Rig-veda VIII, 44, 16)!--O Videgha-a-a!'

1.4.1.13 Still he did not answer. (The priest continued), 'Thee, O butter-sprinkled one, we invoke! (Rig-veda V, 26, 2);' so much he uttered, when at the very mentioning of butter, Agni Vaisvânara flashed forth from the (king's) mouth: he was unable to hold him back; he issued from his mouth, and fell down on this earth.

1.4.1.14 Mâthava, the Videgha, was at that time on the (river) Sarasvatî 1. He (Agni) thence went burning along this earth towards the east; and Gotama Râhûgana and the Videgha Mâthava followed after him as he was burning along. He burnt over (dried up) all these rivers. Now that (river), which is called 'Sadânîrâ,' flows from the northern (Himâlaya) mountain: that one he did not burn over. That one the Brâhmans did not cross in former times, thinking, 'it has not been burnt over by Agni Vaisvânara.'

1.4.1.15 Now-a-days, however, there are many Brâhmans to the east of it. At that time it (the land east of the Sadânîrâ) was very uncultivated, very marshy, because it had not been tasted by Agni Vaisvânara.

1.4.1.16 Now-a-days, however, it is very cultivated, for the Brâhmans have caused (Agni) to taste it through sacrifices. Even in late summer that (river), as it were, rages along 1: so cold is it, not having been burnt over by Agni Vaisvânara.

1.4.1.17 Mâthava, the Videgha, then said (to Agni), 'Where am I to abide?' 'To the east of this (river) be thy abode!' said he. Even now this (river) forms the boundary of the Kosalas and Videhas; for these are the Mâthavas (or descendants of Mâthava).

1.4.1.18 Gotama Râhûgana then said (to Mâthava), 'Why didst thou not answer when addressed by us?' He replied, 'Agni Vaisvânara was in my mouth; I did not reply, lest he should escape from my mouth.'

1.4.1.19 'How then did this happen?'--'At the moment when thou didst utter the words, "(Thee), O butter-sprinkled one, we invoke!" just then, at the mention of butter, Agni Vaisvânara flashed forth from my mouth; I was unable to hold him back, he issued from my mouth.'

1.4.1.20 That (word) in the sâmidhenîs, therefore, which contains butter (ghrita) is especially suitable for kindling (sam-indh); and by it he accordingly kindles him (Agni, the fire) and bestows vigour on this (sacrificer).

1.4.1.21 Now that (word) is ghritâkyâ, 'with the buttered (spoon).' -- 'He nears the gods, wishful of bliss.' Wishful of bliss, truly, is the sacrificer, since he wishes to approach the gods, to go to the gods: therefore he says, 'he nears the gods, wishful of bliss.' This (verse), which is addressed to Agni, is undefined (vague); and undefined, doubtless, is the 'All;' he thus commences (this holy work) with the All.

1.4.1.22 [He recites the second sâmidhenî]: 'Come hither, Agni, to expand!' -- 'To expand' he says, because at the beginning these worlds were well-nigh contiguous to one another: at that time one could touch the sky thus 1.

1.4.1.23 The gods desired, 'How could these worlds of ours become farther apart from one another? How could there be more space for us?' They breathed through them (the worlds) with these three syllables (forming the word) 'vîtaye 2,' and these worlds became far apart from one another; and there was then ampler space for the gods: ample space, therefore, he will have for whom, knowing this, they recite this (verse) containing (the word) 'vîtaye.'

1.4.1.24 He proceeds, 'Invoked for the giver of oblations!' 'The giver of oblations,' of course, is the sacrificer: hence 'invoked for the sacrificer' is what he thereby means to say.--'As Hotri on the barhis sit!' Agni, indeed, is the Hotri, and the barhis (the covering of sacrificial grass on the altar) is this world: hence he thereby establishes Agni (the fire) in this world, as this fire is established (or, beneficial, hita) in this world. This (verse), then, is recited with reference to this world (the earth): through it this world is conquered by him for whom, knowing this, they recite this (verse).

1.4.1.25 [He recites the third sâmidhenî]: 'With samidhs thee, O Aṅgiras!'--with samidhs (kindling-sticks), indeed, the Aṅgiras kindled him. 'O Aṅgiras!' he says, for Agni is indeed Aṅgiras 1.--'With butter we exhilarate!' This (viz. ghritena, 'with butter') is a word which is especially suitable for the kindling of Agni: by it he kindles him, and bestows vigour on this (sacrificer).

1.4.1.26 'Shine forth, O youngest, brilliantly!' he adds; for brilliantly he shines, when kindled; and 'O youngest!' he says, because he is really the youngest Agni 2: therefore he says, 'O youngest!' This (verse) is recited with reference to yonder world, to wit, the aërial world; hence this (verse), which is addressed to Agni, is undefined, for undefined is yonder world: that world he thereby gains, for whom, knowing this, they recite this verse.

1.4.1.27 [He recites the fourth sâmidhenî]: 'Agni, do thou obtain for us that (region) wide and glorious!' For wide, indeed, is yonder (region) wherein the gods (dwell), and glorious is that (region) wherein the gods (dwell). When he says, 'Do thou obtain for us 1,' he means to say, 'make us go to it!'

1.4.1.28 'That great and mighty one, O God!' For great, indeed, is yonder (region) wherein the gods (dwell), and mighty 2 is that wherein the gods (dwell). This (verse), then, is recited with reference to yonder world: that heavenly world he thereby gains, for whom, knowing this, they recite this (verse).

1.4.1.29 He recites (the fifth sâmidhenî): 'Praiseworthy he, adorable,' for worthy of praise he is, and worthy of adoration;--'visible through the veil of gloom,' for when kindled he is seen right through the gloom;--'Agni, the mighty one (bull), is lit,' for he is indeed lit up, the mighty one. [He recites the sixth sâmidhenî]: 'The mighty Agni is lit up,' for he is indeed lit up.

1.4.1.30 'Yea, as a horse that bears the gods,' for having become a horse he does indeed carry the sacrifice to the gods: the (word) 'na' which occurs in this verse has the meaning of 'om' (verily); hence he says, 'Yea, as a horse that bears to the gods.'
1.4.1.31 'With offerings him they glorify,' for with offerings men indeed glorify him; therefore he says, 'with offerings him they glorify.'

1.4.1.32 [He recites the seventh sâmidhenî): 'O mighty one 1! we mighty men do kindle thee, the mighty one!' for they indeed kindle him;--'O Agni, thee that brightly shines!' for he indeed shone brightly when he was kindled.

1.4.1.33 He recites this tristich which contains the word (vrishan), 'mighty.' All these kindling verses, it is true, are addressed to Agni; Indra, however, is the deity of sacrifice, Indra is the mighty (hero); hence these his (the sacrificer's) kindling verses thereby become possessed of Indra: this is the reason why he recites the tristich containing the word 'mighty.'
1.4.1.34 He recites [the eighth sâmidhenî]: 'Agni we choose as messenger!' Now the gods and the Asuras, both of them sprang from Pragâpati, were contending for superiority. When they were thus contending, the gâyatrî stood between them. That gâyatrî was the same as this earth, and this earth indeed lay between them 2. Now both of them knew that whichever she would side with, they would be victorious and the others would be defeated. Both parties then invited her secretly to come to them. Agni acted as messenger for the gods; and an Asura-Rakshas, named Saharakshas 1, for the Asuras. She then followed Agni: he therefore recites, 'Agni we choose for messenger,' because he was the messenger of the gods.--'As Hotri the all-knowing, him!'

1.4.1.35 Here now some people recite, 'He who is the Hotri of the all-knowing;' lest (in saying 'for Hotri, the all-knowing, him') one should say to oneself 'enough (i.e. have done)!' This, however, he should not do; for by (doing) so they do at the sacrifice what is human; and what is human, is inauspicious at a sacrifice. Therefore, lest he should do what is inauspicious at the sacrifice, he should recite, just as it is recited by the Rik, 'for Hotri, the all-knowing, him!' [He continues], 'Performing well this sacrifice!' for he, Agni, is indeed a good performer of the sacrifice: for this reason he says, 'performing well this sacrifice.' She (gâyatrî, or the earth) sided with the gods, and the gods thereupon were victorious and the Asuras were defeated: and verily he for whom, knowing this, they recite this (verse), is himself victorious and his adversaries are defeated.

1.4.1.36 He therefore recites this, the eighth (sâmidhenî). This, indeed, is peculiarly a gâyatrî verse, since it is of eight syllables that the gâyatrî (metre) consists: for this reason he recites the eighth (sâmidhenî).
1.4.1.37 Here now some people place the two (dhâyyâs) additional kindling verses before (the eighth sâmidhenî), arguing, 'The two dhâyyâs mean food: this edible food we place in front (or, in the mouth, mukhatah).' But let him not do this: for with him who inserts the additional verses before (the eighth), the latter (the eighth) is clearly out of its place 2, since in that case it (and the succeeding verse) become the tenth and eleventh verses. With him, on the other hand, for whom they recite this as the eighth (kindling verse), it is indeed in its proper place: let him therefore insert the two additional verses after (the ninth).

1.4.1.38 [He recites the ninth kindling verse]: 'He who is kindled at the cult'--the cult (adhvara), doubtless, is the sacrifice: 'he who is kindled at the sacrifice' he thereby says;--'Agni, the bright, the laudable,' for he is both bright and laudable;--'the flaming-locked, him we adore!' for when he is kindled, his locks, as it were, flame. Previously to (the beginning of the tenth verse), 'O Agni, worshipped, thou art lit!' let him (the Adhvaryu) put on all the kindling-sticks with the exception of the one stick (which is to be put on at the after-offerings 1); for it is now that the Hotri completes (the kindling); and what then is left of the kindling-sticks, other than the one stick, that is left (unused altogether); and what is left (unused) of the sacrifice, that is left for his (the sacrificer's) spiteful enemy: let him, therefore, previously to this (verse), put on all the samidhs, save one.

1.4.1.39 [He continues]: 'Adore, good worshipper, the gods!' worship (adhvara) doubtless means sacrifice: 'adore the gods, good sacrificer,' he thereby says;--'Oblation-bearer, sure, art thou!' for he, Agni, is indeed the bearer of oblations: for this reason he says 'oblation-bearer, sure, art thou.' [He recites the last sâmidhenî]: 'Make offerings! do reverence! Him, Agni, while the cult proceeds, for your oblation-bearer choose!' by this (verse) he urges them on: 'make offerings and worship! do this for (the accomplishment) of whatever desire you kindled him!' this is what he thereby means to say. 'Him, Agni, while the cult proceeds,' he says, because cult means sacrifice: hence he thereby says, 'him, Agni, whilst the sacrifice proceeds;'--'for your oblation-bearer choose!' for he, Agni, is indeed the oblation-bearer, and for this reason he says 'for your oblation-bearer choose (him)!'

1.4.40. This tristich, containing (the word) 'cult (adhvara),' he thus recites. For once when the gods were engaged in sacrificing, their rivals, the Asuras, wished to injure (dhurv, dhvar) them; but, though desirous of injuring them, they were unable to injure them and were foiled: for this reason the sacrifice is called adhvara ('not damaged, uninterrupted'); and for whomsoever, that knows this, they recite this tristich containing (the word) adhvara ('cult, sacrifice'), his rival, though desirous of injuring him, is foiled; and he, (the sacrificer), moreover, gains as much as one gains by offering a Soma-sacrifice 1.

1.4.2.1 Now in former times the gods appointed Agni to the chief (office), namely, that of Hotri; and having appointed him to the chief (office) saying 'do thou carry this our oblation!' they cheered him up, saying, 'Surely, thou art vigorous; surely, thou art equal to this!' thereby endowing him with vigour, even as in our own days, when they appoint any one from among their kinsmen to the chief (office), they cheer him up saying 'surely, thou art vigorous; surely, thou art equal to this!' thereby endowing him with vigour. By what, therefore, he recites after this, he eulogizes him, puts vigour into him 2.
1.4.2.2 'O Agni, thou art great! O priest (brâhmana), O Bhârata!' for Agni, indeed, is the brahman (sacerdotium): therefore he says 'O Brâhmana!--O Bhârata' he says, because he (Agni) bears (bhar) the oblation to the gods: therefore they say 'Agni is bhârata (the bearer).' Or, he, being the breath, sustains (bhar) these creatures: therefore he says 'O Bhârata (sustainer)!'
1.4.2.3 He now calls on (Agni as) the ancestral (Hotri priest) 1. He thereby introduces him both to the Rishis and to the gods (as if he were to say), 'Of great vigour is he who has obtained the sacrifice!' This is the reason why he calls on (Agni as) the ancestral (Hotri).
1.4.2.4 He calls from the remote end (of the sacrificer's ancestral line) downwards; for it is from the remote end downwards that a race is propagated. He (the Hotri) also thereby propitiates the lord of seniority for him (the Sacrificer); for here among men the father comes first, then the son, and then the grandson: this is the reason why he calls from the remote end downwards.
1.4.2.5 Having named (him as) the ancestral one, he says, '(thou wert) kindled by the gods, kindled by Manu;' for in olden times the gods did kindle him: for this reason he says 'kindled by the gods;' and 'kindled by Manu' he says, because in olden times Manu did kindle him: for this reason he says 'kindled by Manu.'
1.4.2.6 He continues, 'Praised by the Rishis (wert thou);' for in olden times the Rishis did praise him: for this reason he says 'praised by the Rishis.'
1.4.2.7 Further, 'Gladdened by bards (vipra);' for those bards, the Rishis, indeed gladdened him: for this reason he says 'gladdened by bards.'
1.4.2.8 Further, 'Celebrated by sages (kavi);' for those sages, the Rishis, indeed celebrated him: this is why he says 'celebrated by sages.'
1.4.2.9 Further, 'Sharpened by the brahman (the Veda or vedic formulas),' for he is indeed sharpened by the brahman;--'the receiver of butter-offerings,' for he is indeed the receiver of butter-offerings.
1.4.2.10 Further, 'The leader of oblations (yagña), the carrier of (Soma-)sacrifices (adhvara),' for through him they lead forward all oblations, both the domestic oblations and the others: this is why he says 'the leader of oblations.'
1.4.2.11 'The carrier (rathî) of sacrifices;' for being a cart (as it were) he conveys the sacrifice to the gods: this is the reason why he says 'the carrier of sacrifices.'
1.4.2.12 Further, 'The unsurpassed Hotri, the surpassing bearer of oblations;' for him the Rakshas do not surpass (tar): for this reason he says 'the unsurpassed (atûrta) Hotri.' 'The surpassing (tûrni, rather 'swift') bearer of oblations,' for he overcomes (tar) every evil: therefore he says 'the surpassing bearer of oblations 1.'
1.4.2.13 Further, 'The mouth-vessel, the offering-spoon of the gods;' for he, Agni, is indeed the vessel of the gods: therefore they make offerings in Agni to all the gods, he being the vessel of the gods. And, verily, whosoever knows this, obtains the vessel of him whose vessel he desires to obtain 3.
1.4.2.14 Further, 'The cup from which the gods drink;' for from him, being (as it were) a cup, the gods drink (the Soma-libations): for this reason he says 'tfhe cup from which the gods drink.'
1.4.2.15 Further, 'Thou, O Agni! dost encompass the gods, as the felly the spokes;' 'in the same way in which the felly on all sides encompasses the spokes, so dost thou on all sides encompass the gods,' this is what he thereby says.
1.4.2.16 'Bring hither the gods for the sacrificer!' this he says in order that he (Agni) may bring the gods to this sacrifice 1.--'Bring Agni hither, O Agni!' this he says in order that he may bring Agni to the butter-portion intended for Agni.--'Bring Soma hither!' this he says in order that he may bring Soma to the butter-portion intended for Soma. 'Bring Agni hither!' this he says in order that he (Agni) may bring Agni hither to that indispensable 2 cake which is offered to Agni on both occasions (at the new- and the full-moon sacrifices).
1.4.2.17 And (in the same way) according to the respective deities. He then continues, 'Bring hither the butter-drinking gods!' this he says in order that he may bring hither the prayâgas and anuyâgas (fore and after-offerings), for the prayâgas and anuyâgas (represent) indeed the butter-drinking gods.--'Bring Agni hither for the Hotriship!' this he says in order that he may bring Agni hither for the office of Hotri.--'Your own greatness bring hither!' this he says in order that he (Agni) may bring hither his own greatness; his own greatness, in truth, is his voice: hence he says it in order that he may bring hither his voice 1.--'Bring thou hither (the gods), O Gâtavedas 2, and offer up a good offering!' what deities he bids him bring hither, with regard to those (deities) he thereby says 'bring them hither!' When he says, 'offer up a good offering!' he means to say, 'sacrifice in the proper order!'
1.4.2.18 He recites (the invitatory prayer) 3 while standing, since it is yonder (sky) which he thereby recites; for, indeed, the invitatory prayer (signifies) yonder (sky), and by it he recites that which is yonder (sky). This is the reason why he recites standing.
1.4.2.19 The offering-prayer 3 he pronounces while sitting, since the offering-prayer (represents) this (earth): hence no one pronounces the offering-prayer while standing; for the offering-prayer is this earth, and by it he pronounces that which is this (earth). This is the reason why he pronounces the offering-prayer while sitting.

1.4.3.1 The fire that has been kindled by means of the kindling verses, assuredly, blazes more brightly than any other fire; for, indeed, it is unassailable, unapproachable.

1.4.3.2 And in like manner as the fire blazes when kindled by means of the kindling verses, so also blazes the priest (brâhmana) that knows and recites the kindling verses; for, indeed, he is unassailable, unapproachable.

1.4.3.3 He recites, 'Pra vah;' for the (word) prâna contains the syllable pra ('forwards;' or, is directed forwards):. hence it is the prâna (out-breathing) which he kindles by this (the first sâmidhenî). [He further recites the second verse], 'Come hither, Agni, to expand!' the backward breathing (apâna), doubtless, is of this nature: the backward breathing he accordingly kindles with this (verse). Further (in the third verse), 'Shine forth, O youngest, brilliantly!' the high-flaming one, indeed, is the upward breathing (udâna): the upward breathing he accordingly kindles with this (the third verse).

1.4.3.4 Further, 'Sa nah prithu sravâyyam,' the 'far-hearing one,' indeed, is the ear, for it is with the ear that one hears here far or widely: the ear he accordingly kindles with this (the fourth verse).

1.4.3.5 Further, 'Praiseworthy he, adorable;' the praiseworthy one, doubtless, is the voice; for it is the voice which praises everything here; by the voice everything is praised here: he accordingly kindles the voice with this (the fifth verse).

1.4.3.6 Further, 'Yea, as a horse that bears (to) the gods;' that which conveys to the gods is indeed the mind, for it is the mind which chiefly conveys the wise man (to the gods): the mind he accordingly kindles with this (the sixth verse).

1.4.3.7 Further, 'O Agni, thee, that brightly shines!' the eye, assuredly, shines: the eye he accordingly kindles by this (the seventh verse).

1.4.3.8 Further, 'Agni we choose for messenger,'--what central breath there is (in the body), that he kindles with this (the eighth verse): that one indeed is the internal motive force of the breathings; from it (two) others tend upwards, and from it (two) others tend downwards, for it is indeed the internal motive force. And whosoever knows that internal motive force of the breathings, him they regard as the internal motive force.
1.4.3.9 Further, 'The flaming-locked, him we adore!' the flaming-locked, doubtless, is the sisna, for it is that organ which chiefly burns (torments) him who is endowed with it: the sisna he accordingly kindles by this (the ninth verse).

1.4.3.10 Further, 'O Agni, worshipped, thou art lit! what downward breathing there is that he kindles with this (the tenth verse); 'make offerings, do reverence!' with this (the eleventh verse) he kindles the entire body from the nails to the hair.

1.4.3.11 And if any one were to curse this one (the Hotri) at the (recitation of the) first kindling verse, then he (the Hotri) should say to him, 'Thereby thou hast put thine own out-breathing into the fire: by that out-breathing of thine shalt thou undergo suffering!' for this is what would take place.

1.4.3.12 If any one were to curse him at the second (verse), he should say to him, 'Thereby thou hast put thine own in-breathing into the fire: by that in-breathing of thine shalt thou undergo suffering!' for this is what would take place.

1.4.3.13 If any one were to curse him at the third (verse), he should say to him, 'Thereby thou hast put thine own up-breathing into the fire: by that up-breathing of thine shalt thou undergo suffering!' for this is what would take place.

1.4.3.14 If any one were to curse him at the fourth (verse), he should say to him, 'Thereby thou hast put thine own ear into the fire: by that ear of thine shalt thou undergo suffering, thou shalt become deaf!' for this is what would take place.

1.4.3.15 If any one were to curse him at the fifth (verse), he should say to him, 'Thereby thou hast put thine own voice into the fire: by that voice of thine shalt thou undergo suffering, thou shalt become dumb!' for this is what would take place.

1.4.3.16 If any one were to curse him at the sixth (verse), he should say to him, 'Thereby thou hast put thine own mind into the fire: by that mind of thine shalt thou undergo suffering, thou shalt move about as one possessed with the (demon) "mind-stealer," as one deranged in mind!' for this is what would take place.

1.4.3.17 If any one were to curse him at the seventh (verse), he should say to him, 'Thereby thou hast put thine own eye into the fire: by that eye of thine shalt thou undergo suffering, thou shalt become blind!' for this is what would take place.

1.4.3.18 If any one were to curse him at the eighth (verse), he should say to him, 'Thereby thou hast put thine own central breath into the fire: by that central breath of thine shalt thou undergo suffering, thou shalt expire and die!' for this is what would take place.

1.4.3.19 If any one were to curse him at the ninth (verse), he should say to him, 'Thereby thou hast put thine own organ into the fire: by that organ of thine shalt thou undergo suffering, thou shalt become emasculate!' for this is what would take place.

1.4.3.20 If any one were to curse him at the tenth (verse), he should say to him, 'Thereby thou hast put thine own down-breathing into the fire: by that down-breathing of thine shalt thou undergo suffering, thou shalt die from constipation!' for this is what would take place.

1.4.3.21 If any one were to curse him at the eleventh (verse), he should say to him, 'Thereby thou hast put thine entire body into the fire: with that entire body of thine shalt thou undergo suffering, thou shalt swiftly pass to yonder world!' for this is what would take place.

1.4.3.22 For in like manner as one undergoes suffering on approaching the fire that has been kindled by means of the kindling verses, so also does one undergo suffering for cursing a priest (brâhmana) who knows and recites the kindling verses.


1.4.4.1 That same fire, then, they have kindled, (thinking), 'In it, when kindled, we will sacrifice to the gods.' In it, indeed, he makes these two first oblations to Mind and Speech (or, Voice); for mind and speech, when yoked together, convey the sacrifice to the gods.

1.4.4.2 Now, what is performed (with formulas, pronounced) in a low voice, by that the mind conveys the sacrifice to the gods; and what is performed (with formulas) distinctly uttered by speech, by that the speech conveys the sacrifice to the gods. And thus takes place here a twofold performance, whereby he gratifies these two, thinking, 'gratified and pleased, these two shall convey the sacrifice to the gods.'

1.4.4.3 With the dipping-spoon (sruva, m.) he makes that libation (of clarified butter) which he makes for the mind; for the mind (manas, n.!) is male, and male is the sruva.

1.4.4.4 With the offering-spoon (sruk, f.) he makes that libation which he makes for speech (vâk, f.); for speech is female, and female is the sruk.

1.4.4.5 Silently (without a formula) and even without 'svâhâ (hail)!' he makes that libation which he makes for the mind; for undefined (or indistinct) is the mind, and undefined is what takes place silently.

1.4.4.6 With a mantra he makes that libation which he makes for speech; for distinct is speech, and distinct is the formula.

1.4.4.7 Sitting he makes that libation which he makes for the mind, and standing that which he makes for speech. Mind and speech, when yoked together, assuredly convey the sacrifice to the gods. But when one of two yoke-fellows is smaller (than the other) they give him a shoulder-piece. Now speech is indeed smaller than mind; for mind is by far the more unlimited, and speech is by far the more limited (of the two); hence he thereby (by standing) gives a shoulder-piece to speech, and as well-matched yoke-fellows these two now convey the sacrifice to the gods: for speech, therefore, he sprinkles while standing.

1.4.4.8 Now the gods, when they were performing sacrifice, were afraid of a disturbance on the part of the Asuras and Rakshas. They, therefore, stood up erect against them on the south side (of the sacrificial ground); for strength is, as it were, erect; hence he makes the (second) libation while standing to the south (of the fire). When he makes a libation on each side (of the fire, north and south), this (pair), mind and speech, though indeed joined together, become separate: for one of the two libations is the head of the sacrifice and the other is its root.

1.4.4.9 With the dipping-spoon (sruva) he makes that libation which is the root of the sacrifice, and with the offering-spoon (sruk) that which is the head of the sacrifice.

1.4.4.10 Silently he makes that libation which is the root of the sacrifice; for silent, as it were, is this root (of trees &c.), and in it the voice does not sound.

1.4.4.11 With a formula he makes that libation which is the head of the sacrifice; for the formula is speech, and from the head this speech sounds.

1.4.4.12 Sitting he makes that libation which is the root of the sacrifice; for seated, as it were, is this root. Standing he makes that libation which is the head of the sacrifice; for this head stands, as it were.

1.4.4.13 When he has made the first libation with the dipping-spoon, he says, 'Agnîdh, sweep (touch over) the fire 1!' In like manner as one would lay the yoke on (the shoulders of the team), so also he makes that first libation; for after laying on the yoke they fasten (the team to it).

1.4.4.14 He (the Âgnîdhra) then sweeps (the fire with the band of the fire-wood): he thereby harnesses it, thinking, 'Now that it has been harnessed, may it convey the sacrifice to the gods!' for this reason he sweeps it. While sweeping it he moves around, since in harnessing they move around the team. He sweeps thrice each time (i.e. thrice along each of the three enclosing-sticks): threefold is the sacrifice.

1.4.4.15 He sweeps (once), with the text (Vâg. S. II, 7 a), 'O Agni, food-gainer! I cleanse thee, the food-gainer, who art about to hasten to the food!' Whereby he says, 'I cleanse thee who art going to convey the sacrifice (to the gods), thee fit for the sacrifice!' He then sweeps thrice over (the fire) silently: for just as, after harnessing (the animal), one urges it on, saying, 'Go on! pull!' so does he thereby strike it with the lash, thinking, 'Go on and convey the sacrifice to the gods!' That is why he (sweeps) thrice over it silently; and in like manner as this act is performed between (the two sprinklings of butter), so this mind and speech, though forming one, thereby become, as it were, separate.


1.4.5.1 When he (the Adhvaryu) is about to make the second libation with the offering-spoon (sruk), he (twice) lays his joined hands (añgali) on the ground before the two offering-spoons (guhû and upabhrit), with the formulas (Vâg. S. II, 7 b), 'Adoration to the gods!' 'Svadhâ to the fathers!' Thereby he propitiates the gods and the fathers, now that he is about to perform the duties of the sacrificial priest. With the formula, 'May ye two be easy to manage for me!' he takes the two offering-spoons: he thereby means to say, 'May ye two be easy to handle for me; may I be able to handle you!'--He further says (Vâg. S. II. 8), 'May I this day offer up the butter to the gods unspilt!' whereby he means to say, 'May I to-day perform an undisturbed sacrifice to the gods!'
1.4.5.2 And again, 'May I not sin against thee with my foot, O Vishnu!' Vishnu, indeed, is the sacrifice: it is the latter therefore that he propitiates by saying, 'may I not sin against thee!' Further, 'May I step into thy wealth-abounding shade, O Agni!' whereby he says, 'may I step into thy auspicious shade, O Agni!'

1.4.5.3 Further, 'Thou art the abode of Vishnu!' Vishnu, indeed, is the sacrifice, and near to this he now stands: this is why he says, 'thou art the abode of Vishnu!'--'Here Indra performed his heroic deed;' for it was while standing in this place that Indra drove off towards the south the evil spirits, the Rakshas: for this reason he says, 'here Indra performed his heroic deed.'--'Erect stood the cult;' cult, namely, means sacrifice, hence he thereby says 'erect stood the sacrifice.'

1.4.5.4 Further (Vâg. S. II, 9): 'O Agni, take thou upon thyself the office of Hotri, take thou upon thyself the part of messenger!' for Agni is both Hotri and messenger to the gods: hence he thereby says, 'know thou both (offices) which thou art (holding) for the gods!'--'May earth and heaven guard thee! Guard thou earth and heaven!' there is nothing obscure in this.--'Indra, by this butter-oblation, may be the maker of good offering (svishtakrit) for the gods! Svâhâ!' Indra, indeed, is the deity of sacrifice; therefore he says 'Indra, by this butter-oblation ...' It is for speech that he makes this sprinkling, and Indra is speech' so say some; and for this reason also he says Indra, by this butter-oblation ...'

1.4.5.5 Having then returned (to his former position behind the altar), without letting the two offering-spoons touch each other, he mixes (some of the butter left in the guhû) with (that in) the dhruvâ. Now the second libation (which he has just offered) is the head of the sacrifice, and the dhruvâ is its body: hence he thereby replaces the head on the body. And the second libation, moreover, is the head of the sacrifice, and the head (siras) represents excellence (srî), for the head does indeed represent excellence: hence, of one who is the most excellent (sreshtha) of a community, people say that he is 'the head of that community.'
1.4.5.6 The sacrificer, assuredly, stands behind the dhruvâ, and he who means evil to him stands behind the upabhrit. Hence if he were to mix (the butter remaining in the guhû) with (that in) the upabhrit, he would bestow excellence on him who means evil to the sacrificer; but in this, way he bestows that excellence on the sacrificer himself: for this reason he mixes (the butter in the gull with (that in) the dhruvâ.

1.4.5.7 He mixes it, with the text (Vâg. S. II, 9 h), 'Light with light!' for light (lustre), indeed, is the butter in the one (spoon) and light also is that in the other. Thereby these two lights unite with each other, and for this reason he mixes (the butter) in this manner.

1.4.5.8 Now a dispute once took place between Mind and Speech as to which was the better of the two. Both Mind and Speech said, 'I am excellent!'

1.4.5.9 Mind said, 'Surely I am better than thou, for thou dost not speak anything that is not understood by me; and since thou art only an imitator of what is done by me and a follower in my wake, I am surely better than thou!'

1.4.5.10 Speech said, 'Surely I am better than thou, for what thou knowest I make known, I communicate.'
1.4.5.11 They went to appeal to Pragâpati for his decision. He, Pragâpati, decided in favour of Mind, saying (to Speech), 'Mind is indeed better than thou, for thou art an imitator of its deeds and a follower in its wake; and inferior, surely, is he who imitates his better's deeds and follows in his wake.'

1.4.5.12 Then Speech (vâk, fem.) being thus gainsaid, was dismayed and miscarried. She, Speech, then said to Pragâpati, 'May I never be thy oblation-bearer, I whom thou hast gainsaid!' Hence whatever at the sacrifice is performed for Pragâpati, that is performed in a low voice; for speech would not act as oblation-bearer for Pragâpati.

1.4.5.13 That germ (retas) the gods then brought away in a skin or in some (vessel). They asked: 'Is it here (atra)?' and therefore it developed into Atri. For the same reason one becomes guilty by (intercourse) with a woman who has just miscarried (âtreyî); for it is from that woman, from the goddess Speech, that these (germs) originate.

1.5.1.1 He (the Adhvaryu) now utters his call for the Pravara (choosing of the Hotri) 2. The reason why he utters his call, is that the (Adhvaryu's) call is the sacrifice: 'having bespoke the sacrifice, I will choose the Hotri,' thus (he thinks, and) for this reason he utters his call for the Pravara.

1.5.1.2 He utters his call after taking the fuel-band; for if the Adhvaryu were to utter his call without taking hold of the sacrifice, he would either be unsteady or meet with some other ailment.

1.5.1.3 Here now some utter the call after taking sacrificial grass (barhis) from the covered altar, or they utter the call after cutting off and taking a chip of fire-wood, arguing, 'this, surely, is something belonging to the sacrifice; after taking hold of this, the sacrifice, we will utter the call.' Let him, however, not do this; for that also wherewith the firewood was tied together and wherewith they sweep the fire 1 is, doubtless, something belonging to the sacrifice; and thus indeed he utters his call after taking hold of the sacrifice: for this reason let him utter the call after taking the fuel-band.

1.5.1.4 Having uttered the call, he in the first place chooses him who is the Hotri of the gods, that is, Agni. Thereby he propitiates both Agni and the gods: for by first choosing Agni, he propitiates Agni; and by first choosing him who is the Hotri of the gods, he propitiates the gods.
1.5.1.5 He says, 'Agni, the god, the divine Hotri--,' for Agni is indeed the Hotri of the gods, therefore he says 'Agni, the god, the divine Hotri:' thereby he propitiates both Agni and the gods; for by his first mentioning Agni he propitiates Agni; and by his first mentioning him who is the Hotri of the gods, he propitiates the gods.

1.5.1.6 'May he worship, knowing the gods, he the thoughtful one,'--for he, Agni, indeed, knows the gods well: hence, he thereby says 'may he who knows them well worship (them) in due form!

1.5.1.7 'Like as Manu (did), like as Bharata;'--Manu, indeed, worshipped with sacrifice in olden times, and doing as he did these descendants of his now sacrifice: therefore he says 'like as Manu.' Or, say they, (it means) 'at the sacrifice of Manu,' and therefore he says 'as (he did) with Manu.'

1.5.1.8 'Like as (with) Bharata,'--for, say they, he bears (bhar) the oblation to the gods, hence Bharata (the bearer) is Agni; or, say they, he, having become the breath, supports (bhar) these creatures, and therefore he says 'like as Bharata.'

1.5.1.9 He then chooses (Agni as) the ancestral (Hotri). He thus introduces him both to the (ancestral) rishis and to the gods (as if he were saying), 'he is of mighty strength who obtained the sacrifice!' for this reason he chooses (him as) the ancestral one.

1.5.1.10 He chooses from the remote end (of the sacrificer's ancestral line) downwards; for it is from the remote end downwards that a race is propagated. Thereby he also propitiates the lord of seniority; for here among men the father comes first, then the son, and then the grandson: this is the reason why he chooses from the remote end downwards.

1.5.1.11 Having named the ancestral, he says, 'Like as, Brahman;'--for Agni is the Brahman (the Veda, or the sacerdotium), and therefore he says 'like as Brahman;'--'may he bring (the gods) hither!' what deities he bids him bring hither, those he refers to in saying 'may he bring (them) hither.'

1.5.1.12 'The Brâhmanas (priests) are the guardians of this sacrifice;' for guardians of the sacrifice, indeed, are those Brâhmanas who are versed in the sacred writ, because they spread it, they originate it: these he thereby propitiates; and for this reason he says, 'the Brâhmanas are the guardians of the sacrifice.'

1.5.1.13 'N.N. is the man,' thereby he chooses this man for his Hotri; heretofore he was not a Hotri, but now he is a Hotri.

1.5.1.14 The chosen Hotri mutters,--has recourse to the deities: in order that he may give the vashat-call to the gods in its proper order, that he may convey the oblation to the gods in its proper order, that he may not stumble, he has thus recourse to the deities.

1.5.1.15 He mutters on this occasion, 'Thee, O divine Savitri, they now choose,'--thereby he has recourse to Savitri for his impulsion (prasava), for Savitri is the impeller (prasavitri) of the gods;--'(thee who art) Agni, for the Hotriship,' thereby he propitiates both Agni and the gods; for by first naming Agni, he propitiates Agni; and by first naming him who is the Hotri of the gods, he propitiates the gods.

1.5.1.16 'Together with father Vaisvânara,'--for the father Vaisvânara ('common to all men'), doubtless, is the year, is Pragâpati (lord of creatures); hence he thereby propitiates the year and thus Pragâpati.--'O Agni! O Pûshan! O Brihaspati! speak forth and offer up sacrifice (pra-yag)!'--he (the Hotri), namely, will have to recite the anuvâkyâs and the yâgyâs; he therefore now propitiates those gods: do ye recite, 'do ye offer!' thus (he thereby says).

1.5.1.17 'May we partake of the bounty of the Vasus, of the wide sway of the Rudras! may we be beloved of the Âdityas for the sake of (aditi) security from injury, free from obstruction!'--these, to wit, the Vasus, Rudras, and Âdityas, namely, are three (classes of) gods: 'may we enjoy their protection' he thereby says.

1.5.1.18 'May I this day utter speech that is agreeable to the gods;'--by this he means to say 'may I this day recite what is agreeable to the gods,' for auspicious it is when one recites what is agreeable to the gods.

1.5.1.19 'Agreeable to the Brahmans,'--by this he means to say 'may I this day recite what is agreeable to the Brâhmanas (priests);' for auspicious it is when one recites what is agreeable to the Brâhmanas.
1.5.1.20 'Agreeable to Narâsamsa,'--man (nara), namely, is a creature: hence he says this for all the creatures; thereby it is auspicious, and whether or not he knows (forms of speech that are agreeable), they are uttered (and received with applause), 'well he has recited! well he has recited!'--'What at the Hotri choice may escape the crooked eye this day, that may Agni bring back here, he, the knower of beings (gâtavedas), the nimble one (vikarshani)!'--by this he means to say, 'even as those (three) Agnis, whom they first chose for the Hotriship, passed aways, (but thou, the fourth Agni, wast then obtained,) so do thou make good for me whatever mistake may have been committed at my election!' and it is accordingly made good for him.
1.5.1.21 He now touches the Adhvaryu and the Âgnîdhra: for the Adhvaryu is the mind, and the Hotri is, speech: thus he thereby brings mind and speech together.
1.5.1.22 At the same time he mutters 3, 'From anguish may the six spaces protect me, fire, earth, water, wind, day, and night 4!'--'may these deities protect me from disease!' thus he thereby says; for he whom these deities protect from disease, will not stumble (or fail).
1.5.1.23 He steps beside the Hotri's seat, takes one stalk of (reed) grass from the Hotri's seat and casts it outside (the sacrificial ground), with the formula, 'Ejected is the wealth-clutcher (parâvasu, lit. "off-wealth")!' Formerly, namely, the Hotri of the Asuras was one Parâvasu by name: him he thereby ejects from the Hotri's seat.

1.5.1.24 He then sits down on the Hotri's seat, with the formula, 'I here sit down on the seat of the wealth-bestower (arvâvasu, lit. "hither-wealth")!' for one Arvâvasu by name was the Hotri of the gods 1, and on his seat he accordingly sits down.
1.5.1.25 At the same time he mutters, 'O All-maker, thou art the protector of lives! do not ye two (fires) scorch me away (from this) 2, injure me not! this is your sphere;' with this he moves slightly northwards: by this (mantra, he indicates that) he sits midway between the Âhavanîya and the Gârhapatya, and thus he propitiates these two; and in accordance with what he says, 'do not scorch me away from this! injure me not!' they do not injure him.
1.5.1.26 He then mutters whilst looking at the (Âhavanîya) fire, 'All ye gods, instruct me, how and what I am to mind while seated here as the chosen Hotri! declare my share (of the sacrificial duties), how and by what road I am to convey the oblation to you!'--for as one says to those for whom food has been cooked, 'order me how I am to bring if you, how I am to serve it up for you!' in like manner he is desirous of directions regarding the gods, and for this reason he mutters thus, 'instruct me how I may utter the Vashat-call for you in its proper order, how I may bring you the oblation in its proper order!'

1.5.2.1 [The Hotri continues], 'May Agni, the priest (hotri), know (undertake) Agni's priestly duty (hautram),'--thereby he says 'may Agni, as Hotri, know this!' 'Agni's priestly duty' he says, because it is his duty that he must know;--'that means of salvation 1,'--the means of salvation, assuredly, is the sacrifice: 'may he know the sacrifice' is what he thereby says.--'Favourable to thee, O Sacrificer, is the deity!' by this he says 'favourable is the deity to thee, O Sacrificer, whose Hotri is Agni 1!'--'Take up 2 the spoon, O Adhvaryu, full of butter!' thereby he urges on the Adhvaryu. The reason why he mentions one (spoon) only (is this).

1.5.2.2 The Sacrificer, doubtless, stands behind the guhû, and he, who means evil to him, stands behind the upabhrit; and if he were to speak of two (spoons), he would cause the spiteful enemy to countervail the Sacrificer. Behind the guhû stands the eater, and behind the upabhrit the one to be eaten; and if he were to speak of two (spoons), he would make the one to be eaten countervail the eater. For these reasons he speaks of one (spoon) only.

1.5.2.3 [He continues],'--(the spoon which is) devoted to the gods, possessed of all boons,' he praises, he magnifies it when he says 'devoted to the gods, possessed of all boons.'--'Let us praise the gods, the praiseworthy! let us adore the adorable! let us worship the worshipful!' that is, 'let us praise those gods who are praiseworthy! let us adore those who are adorable! let us worship those who are worthy of worship!' the praiseworthy, to wit, are the men, the adorable the fathers, and the worshipful the gods.

1.5.2.4 For, indeed, the creatures that are not allowed to take part in the sacrifice are forlorn; and therefore he makes those creatures here on earth that are not forlorn, take part in the sacrifice: behind the men are the beasts, and behind the gods are the birds, the plants, and the trees; and thus all that here exists is made to take part in the sacrifice.

1.5.2.5 These same (preceding formulas) are nine utterances; for nine, in number, are those breaths (or vital airs) in man 1, and these he thereby puts into him (the sacrificer): for this reason there are nine utterances.

1.5.2.6 The sacrifice fled away from the gods. The gods called out after it, 'Listen (a-sru) to us 2! come back to us!' It replied, 'So be it!' and returned to the gods; and with what had thus returned to them, the gods worshipped; and by worshipping with it they became the gods they now are.

1.5.2.7 Now when he (the Adhvaryu) calls (on the Âgnîdhra), he thereby calls after the sacrifice, 'Listen to us! come back to us!' and when he (the Âgnîdhra) responds, then the sacrifice comes back, saying 'so be it!' and with it, thus passing over to them, as with seed 3, the priests carry on the tradition, imperceptibly to the sacrificer; for even as people hand on from one to the other a full vessel 4, in the same way they (the priests) hand down that (sacrifice) from one to the other. They hand it down by means of speech, for the sacrifice is speech (prayer), and speech is seed: therefore they keep up the tradition by means of it.

1.5.2.8 After he has said (to the Hotri), 'Recite!' the Adhvaryu must utter nothing improper (worldly); neither must the Hotri utter anything improper. The Adhvaryu 1 utters his call: thereby the sacrifice passes on to the Âgnîdhra.

1.5.2.9 The Âgnîdhra must utter nothing improper until his response. The Âgnîdhra responds: thereby the sacrifice passes back to the Adhvaryu.

1.5.2.10 The Adhvaryu must utter nothing improper until he pronounces (the word) 'yaga (recite the offering-prayer):' in saying 'yaga' the Adhvaryu hands the sacrifice on to the Hotri.

1.5.2.11 The Hotri must utter nothing improper until his vashat-call. By the vashat-call he pours it (the sacrifice) into the fire, as seed into the womb; for the fire is indeed the womb of the sacrifice, from thence it is brought forth. So now at the havis-sacrifice. And at the Soma-cult,--

1.5.2.12 When he has drawn (the Soma), the Adhvaryu must not utter anything improper until his summons (for the chanting of the stotra 1): with the call 'draw near!' the Adhvaryu hands the sacrifice on to the Udgâtris (chanters).

1.5.2.13 The Udgâtris must not utter anything improper until the last (stotra-verse): 'this is the last one,' thus thinking, the Udgâtris hand on the sacrifice to the Hotri.
1.5.2.14 The Hotri must utter nothing improper until the vashat-call. With the vashat-call he pours it (the sacrifice) into the fire, as seed into the womb; for the fire is indeed the womb of the sacrifice, since from thence it is brought forth.
1.5.2.15 If he whom the sacrifice approaches were to utter anything improper, he would waste the sacrifice, even as he might waste (water by spilling from) a full vessel. And where the officiating priests thus practice sacrifice with a perfect mutual understanding between them, there everything works regularly and no hitch occurs: therefore it is in this way that the sacrifice must be nursed.
1.5.2.16 Now there are here five utterances, viz. (1) 'Bid (him, Agni, or them) hear!' (2) 'Yea, may he (or, one) hear!' (3) 'Pronounce the prayer to the kindling-sticks!' (4) 'We who pronounce the prayer . . .' (5) 'May he bear (the sacrifice to the gods)!' fivefold is the sacrifice, fivefold the animal victim, five are the seasons of the year: this is the one measure of the sacrifice, this its consummation.
1.5.2.17 These (five formulas) consist of seventeen syllables;--seventeenfold, indeed, is Pragâpati, and Pragâpati is the sacrifice: this is the one measure of the sacrifice, this its consummation.
1.5.2.18 With 'O srâvaya!' the gods sent forth the east wind; with 'Astu sraushat!' they caused the clouds to flow together; with 'Yaga (pronounce the yâgyâ)!' (they sent forth) the lightning; with' Ye yagâmahe (we who pray),' the thunder; with the vashat-call they caused it to rain.
1.5.2.19 Should he (the sacrificer) be desirous of rain, or should he perform a special offering, or even at the new- and full-moon sacrifice itself, he may say, 'Verily, I am desirous of rain!'--and he may also say to the Adhvaryu, 'Ponder thou in thy mind the east wind and the lightning!'--to the Âgnîdhra, 'Ponder thou the clouds in thy mind!'--to the Hotri, 'Ponder thou in thy mind the thunder and rain!'--to the Brahman, 'Ponder thou all, these in thy mind!'--for where the officiating priests thus practice sacrifice with a perfect mutual understanding between them, there it will indeed rain.
1.5.2.20 With 'O srâvaya!' the gods called the shining one (virâg, viz. cow), with 'Astu sraushat!' they untied the calf and let it go to her; with 'Yaga!' they raised (its head to the udder of the cow); with 'Ye yagâmahe!' they sat down by her (for milking); with the vashat-call they milked her. The shining one, doubtless, is this (earth), and of her this is the milking: and for him who knows this to be the milking of the shining one, this shining (earth-cow) thus milks out all his desires.


1.5.3.1 The fore-offerings (prayâga), assuredly, are the seasons: hence there are five of them, for there are five seasons.

1.5.3.2 The gods and the Asuras, both of them sprang from Pragâpati, were once contending for this sacrifice, (which is) their father Pragâpati, the year: 'Ours it (he) shall be!' 'Ours it (he) shall be!' they said.

1.5.3.3 Then the gods went on praising and toiling. They saw these fore-offerings and worshipped with them. By means of them they gained (pra-gi) the seasons, the year; they deprived their rivals of the seasons, of the year: hence (the fore-offerings are) victories (pragaya), for, assuredly, pragaya is the very same term as prayâga (fore-offering) 1. And in the same way this one (the sacrificer) wins by means of them the seasons, the year; deprives his rivals of the seasons, of the year. This is the reason why he performs the fore-offerings.

1.5.3.4 The sacrificial food at these offerings consists of clarified butter. Now the butter, indeed, is a thunderbolt, and with that thunderbolt, the butter, the gods gained the seasons, the year, and deprived their rivals of the seasons, of the year. And with that thunderbolt, the butter, he now, in the same way, gains the seasons, the year, and deprives his enemies of the seasons, of the year. For this reason clarified butter forms the sacrificial food at these (offerings).

1.5.3.5 Now this bffutter is the year's own liquor: hence the gods gained it (the year) by means of its own liquor; and in the same way he also now gains it by means of its own liquor. This is the reason why clarified butter forms the sacrificial food at these (fore-offerings).

1.5.3.6 Let him (the Adhvaryu) not move from that same spot where he may be standing when he calls for the fore-offerings. A battle, it is true, is witnessed whenever any one performs the fore-offerings, and whichever of the two combatants is worsted, that one, no doubt, retreats; and he who obtains the victory, advances still nearer: he (the Adhvaryu) might therefore (feel inclined to) step nearer and nearer (to the fire), and offer the oblations (while moving) nearer and nearer 1.

1.5.3.7 This, however, he should not do; he should not move from that same spot where he may be standing when he calls for the fore-offerings. Let him rather offer the (five) oblations in that part (of the fire) where he thinks there is the fiercest blaze; for only by being offered in blazing (fire), oblations are successful.

1.5.3.8 He (the Adhvaryu), having called (on, and having been responded to by, the Âgnîdhra), says (to the Hotri), 'Pronounce the offering-prayer (yâgyâ) to the Samidhs (kindling-sticks)!' Thereby he kindles the spring; the spring, when kindled, kindles the other seasons; the seasons, when kindled, generate the creatures and ripen the plants. In the same (formula) he also implies the (four) remaining seasons, and in order to avoid sameness, he introduces the others by merely saying each time, 'Pronounce the offering-prayer!' For were he to say, 'Pronounce the offering-prayer to Tanûnapât!' 'Pronounce the offering-prayer to the Ids!' and so on, he would commit (the fault of) repetition: hence he introduces the remaining (seasons or fore-offerings) by merely saying each time, 'Pronounce the offering-prayer 1!'

1.5.3.9 He (the Hotri) now pronounces the offering-prayer (yâgyâ) to the Samidhs. The samidh (kindler), doubtless, is the spring. The gods, at that time, appropriated the spring, and deprived their rivals of the spring; and now this one (the sacrificer) also appropriates the spring, and deprives his rivals of the spring: this is the reason why he pronounces the offering-prayer to the Samidhs.

1.5.3.10 After that he pronounces the offering-prayer to Tanûnapât. Tanûnapât, doubtless, is the summer; for the summer burns the bodies (tanûn tapati) of these creatures. The gods, at that time, appropriated the summer, and deprived their rivals of the summer; and now this one also appropriates the summer, and deprives his rivals of the summer: this is the reason why he pronounces the offering-prayer to Tanûnapât.

1.5.3.11 He then pronounces the offering-prayer to the Ids. The Ids (praises), doubtless, are the rains; they are the rains, inasmuch as the vile, crawling (vermin) 1 which shrink during the summer and winter, then (in the rainy season) move about in quest of food, as it were, praising (îd) the rains: therefore the Ids are the rains. The gods, at that time, appropriated the rains, and deprived their rivals of the rains; and now this one also appropriates the rains, and deprives his rivals of the rains: this is the reason why he pronounces the offering-prayer to the Ids.

1.5.3.12 He then pronounces the offering-prayer to the Barhis (covering of sacrificial grass on the altar). The barhis, doubtless, is the autumn; the barhis is the autumn, inasmuch as these plants which shrink during the summer and winter grow by the rains, and in autumn lie spread open after the fashion of barhis: for this reason the barhis is the autumn. The gods, at that time, appropriated the autumn, and deprived their rivals of the autumn; and now this one also appropriates the autumn, and deprives his rivals of the autumn: this is why he pronounces the prayer to the barhis.

1.5.3.13 He then pronounces the offering-prayer with 'Svâhâ! Svâhâ 1!' The Svâhâ-call, namely, marks the end of the sacrifice, and the end of the year is the winter, since the winter is on the other (remoter) side of the spring. By the end (of the sacrifice) the gods, at that time, appropriated the end (of the year); by the end they deprived their rivals of the end; and by the end this one also now appropriates the end; by the end he deprives his rivals of the end: this is why he pronounces the offering-prayers with 'Svâhâ! Svâhâ!'

1.5.3.14 Now the spring, assuredly, comes into life again out of the winter, for out of the one the other is born again: therefore he who knows this, is indeed born again in this world.

1.5.3.15 In order to avoid sameness he prays (alternately) with 'may they accept!' and 'may he (or it) accept 2!' for he would commit (the fault) of repetition, if he were to pray with 'may they accept!' each time, or with 'may he accept!' each time. By 'may they accept!' doubtless, females (are implied); and by 'may he accept!' a male (is implied): thereby a productive union is effected, and for this reason he prays (alternately) with 'may they accept!' and 'may he (or it) accept!'

1.5.3.16 Now at the fourth fore-offering, to the barhis, he pours (butter) together (into the guhû 1). The barhis, namely, represents descendants, and the butter seed: hence seed is thereby infused into the descendants, and by that infused seed descendants are generated again and again. For this reason he pours together (butter) at the fourth fore-offering, that to the barhis.

1.5.3.17 Now, a battle, as it were, is going on here when any one performs the fore-offerings; and whichever of the two combatants a friend (an ally) joins, he obtains the victory: hence a friend thereby joins the guhû from out of the upabhrit, and by him it (or he) obtains the victory. This is why he pours together (butter) at the fourth fore-offering, that to the barhis.

1.5.3.18 The sacrificer, doubtless, (stands) behind the guhû, and he who means evilf to him, (stands) behind the upabhrit: hence he thereby makes the spiteful enemy pay tribute to the sacrificer. The consumer, doubtless, (stands) behind the guhû, and the one to be consumed behind the upabhrit hence he thereby makes the one that is to be consumed pay tribute to the consumer. This is the reason why he pours (butter) together at the fourth fore-offering, that to the barhis.

1.5.3.19 He pours (the butter) together without (the two spoons) touching (each other). If he were to touch (the one spoon with the other) he would touch the sacrificer with his spiteful enemy, he would touch the consumer with the one to be consumed: for this reason he pours (the butter) together without touching.

1.5.3.20 He holds the guhû over (the upabhrit). Thereby he keeps the sacrificer above his spiteful enemy, he keeps the consumer above the one to be consumed: for this reason he holds the guhû over (the upabhrit).

1.5.3.21 The gods once said, 'Well then, now that the battle has been won, let us establish the entire sacrifice on a firm basis; and should the Asuras and Rakshas (again) trouble us, our sacrifice will then be firmly established!'

1.5.3.22 At the last fore-offering they established the entire sacrifice by means of the Svâhâ ('hail!'). With 'Svâhâ Agni!' they established the butter-portion for Agni; with 'Svâhâ Soma!' they established the butter-portion for Soma; and with (the second) 'Svâhâ Agni!' they established that indispensable sacrificial cake which there is on both occasions (i.e. at the new- and full-moon sacrifices).

1.5.3.23 And so with the (other) deities respectively. With 'Svâhâ the butter-drinking gods!' they established the fore-offerings and the after-offerings (anuyâgas), for the fore-offerings and after-offerings, doubtless, represent the butter-drinking gods. With the formula 'May Agni graciously accept of the butter!' they established Agni as Svishtakrit ('maker of good offering'), for Agni is indeed the maker of good offering. And till this day that sacrifice stands as firm as the gods established it. This is the reason why at the last fore-offering he prays with Svâhâ! Svâhâ!' according to the number of oblations (there are at the chief sacrifice). After he (the sacrificer) has won his battle, he establishes the entire sacrifice on a firm basis, so that, if after this he should violate the proper order of the sacrifice, he need not heed it; for he will know that his sacrifice is firmly established. Now what with exclaiming 'Vashat,' with offering, and with calling out 'Svâhâ,' this same sacrifice was well-nigh exhausted.

1.5.3.24 The gods were anxious as to how they might replenish it, how they might again render it efficient and practise (worshipping) with it, when efficient.

1.5.3.25 Now what was left in the guhû of the butter wherewith they had established the sacrifice, with that they sprinkled the havis (dishes, or kinds, of sacrificial food) one after another, and thereby replenished them and again rendered them efficient, because the butter is indeed efficient. Hence after offering the last fore-offering, he sprinkles the havis one after another, and thereby replenishes them and again renders them efficient, because the butter is indeed efficient. Hence also from whatever sacrificial food he (afterwards at the principal oblations) cuts off (a portion for a deity), that he again sprinkles (with butter), that he replenishes and renders efficient for the (Svishtakrit) maker of good offering. But when he cuts off the portion for the maker of good offering, then he does not again sprinkle (the sacrificial food out of which the portion has been cut), since after that he will not make any other oblation in the fire from the sacrificial food.

1.5.4.1 He (accordingly) pronounces the offering-prayer to the Samidhs (kindling-sticks). The Samidhs (kindlers), doubtless, are the breaths (vital airs), and he thereby kindles the breaths; for this man (the sacrificer) is kindled (animated) by his breaths: hence if he (the sacrificer) be burning (with fever, &c.), he (the Adhvaryu) will say, 'Stroke (thyself)!' If he be hot, then one may feel confident, for then he is kindled; and if he be cold, then one need hope no longer. Thus he thereby puts the breaths into him: this is the reason why he pronounces the prayer to the Samidhs.
1.5.4.2 He then pronounces the offering-prayer to Tanûnapât. Tanûnapât, doubtless, is seed; hence he thereby casts seed: this is why he pronounces the prayer to Tanûnapât.
1.5.4.3 He then pronounces the offering-prayer to the Ids. The Ids, doubtless, are offspring; when the seed thus cast springs into life, then it moves about in quest of food, as it were, praising (îd). Hence he thereby makes him (the sacrificer) propagate offspring: this is the reason why he, pronounces the prayer to the Ids.
1.5.4.4 He then pronounces the offering-prayer to the Barhis. The barhis, doubtless, means abundance, hence he thereby produces an abundance: this is why he pronounces the prayer to the barhis.
1.5.4.5 He then pronounces the offering-prayer with 'Svâhâ! Svâhâ!' The Svâhâ-call, indeed, is what the winter is among the seasons; for the winter subjects these creatures to its will: hence in winter the plants wither, and the leaves fall off the trees; the birds retire more and more, and fly lower and lower; and the wicked man has his hair, as it were, falling off 1; for the winter subjects these creatures to its will. And, verily, he who knows this, makes that locality wherein he lives, his own, for his own happiness and supply of food.
1.5.4.6 The gods and the Asuras, both of them sprung from Pragâpati, were once contending for superiority. With staves and bows neither party were able to overcome the other. Neither of them having gained the victory, they (the Asuras) said, 'Well then, let us try to overcome one another by speech, by sacred writ (brahman)! He who cannot follow up our uttered speech by (making up) a pair, shall be defeated and lose everything, and the other party shall win everything!' The gods replied, 'So be it!' The gods said to Indra, 'Speak thou!'
1.5.4.7 Indra said, 'One (eka, m., unus) for me!' The others then said, 'One (ekâ, f., una) for us!' and thus found that (desired) pair, for eka (unus) and ekâ (una) make a pair.
1.5.4.8 Indra said, 'Two (dvau, m., duo) for me!' The others then said, 'Two (dve, f., duae) for us!' and thus found that pair, for dvau (duo) and dve (duae) make a pair.
1.5.4.9 Indra said, 'Three (trayah, m.) for me!' The others then said, 'Three (tisrah, f.) for us!' and thus found that pair, for trayah. and tisrah make a pair.
1.5.4.10 Indra said, 'Four (katvârah, m.) for me!' The others then said, 'Four (katasrah, f.) for us!' and thus found that pair, for katvârah and katasrah make a pair.
1.5.4.11 Indra said, 'Five (pañka, m. f., quinque) for me!' Then the others found no pair, for after that (numeral four) there is no pair, for then both (masculine and feminine) are pañka. Thereupon the Asuras were defeated and lost everything, and the gods won everything from the Asuras, and stripped their rivals, the Asuras, of everything.
1.5.4.12 For this reason let him (the sacrificer) say 1, when the first fore-offering has been performed, 'One (eka) for me!' and 'One (ekâ) for him whom we hate!' And if he should not hate any one, let him say, 'who hates us and whom we hate!'
1.5.4.13 With the second fore-offering, 'Two (dvau) for me!' and 'Two (dve) for him who hates us and whom we hate!'
1.5.4.14 With the third fore-offering, 'Three (trayah) for me!' and 'Three (tisrah) for him who hates us and whom we hate!'
1.5.4.15 With the fourth fore-offering, 'Four (katvârah) for me!' and 'Four (katasrah) for him who hates us and whom we hate!'
1.5.4.16 With the fifth fore-offering, 'Five (pañka) for me!' and 'Nothing for him who hates us and whom we hate!' For, there being 'five' to five,' he (the enemy) is defeated, and whoever knows this, appropriates to himself everything that belongs to that (enemy of his), strips his enemies of everything.

3.7.1.1 He takes the spade, with (Vâg. S. VI, 1), 'I take thee, at the impulse of the divine Savitri, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pûshan: thou art a woman.' The significance of that formula is the same (as before); and that spade (abhri, fem.) is indeed female: therefore he says 'thou art a woman.'
3.7.1.2 He thus draws the outline of the hole (for the stake), with, 'Herewith I cut off the necks of the Rakshas!' The spade is the thunderbolt: with the thunderbolt he thus cuts off the necks of the Rakshas.
3.7.1.3 He then digs, and throws up a heap of earth towards the east. He digs the hole, making it equal (in depth) with the (unhewn) bottom part (of the stake). In front of it he lays down the stake with the top towards the east. Thereon he puts sacrificial grass of the same size, and thereupon he puts the chip of the stake. In front on the (north) side (of the stake) he puts down the head-piece. The sprinkling-water has barley-corns mixed with it: the significance of this is the same (as before).
3.7.1.4 He throws the barley-corns in with, 'Thou art barley (yava), keep thou (yavaya) from us the haters, keep from us the enemies!' There is nothing obscure in this. He then sprinkles: the significance of the sprinkling is one and the same: he thereby renders it sacrificially pure.
3.7.1.5 He sprinkles (the top, middle, and bottom parts) with, 'For the sky--thee! for the air--thee! for the earth--thee!' the stake being a thunderbolt (he does so) for the protection of these worlds: 'I sprinkle thee for the protection of these worlds,' is what he thereby means to say.
3.7.1.6 The sprinkling-water that remains he then pours into the hole with, 'Be the worlds pure wherein the Fathers reside!' for a pit that is dug is sacred to the Fathers: this he thereby renders sacrificially pure.
3.7.1.7 Thereupon he strews barhis-grass therein, both eastward-pointed and northward-pointed, with, 'Thou art the seat of the Fathers!' for that part of it (the stake) which is dug into the ground is sacred to the Fathers: as though it were (naturally) established among plants, and not dug in, so does it become established among those plants.
3.7.1.8 He then throws in the (first) chip of the stake. Now that chip of the outer (bark) doubtless is the vigour of trees; hence, when a chip of their outer (bark) is cut off they dry up, for it is their vigour. Hence, when he throws in the chip of the stake, he does so thinking, 'I will plant it (the stake) full of vigour.' The reason why it is this (chip) and no other, is that this one has been produced with a formula, is sacrificially pure: therefore he throws in the chip of the stake.
3.7.1.9 He throws it in with (Vâg. S. VI, 2), 'Thou art a leader, easy of access to the Unnetris;' for that (chip) is cut from it in front, wherefore he says, 'Thou art a leader, easy of access to the Unnetris.' 'Be thou mindful of this: it will stand upon thee!' for it (the stake) will indeed stand on it, wherefore he says, 'Be thou mindful of this: it will stand upon thee.'
3.7.1.10 Having then taken out ghee with the dipping-spoon, he offers it into the hole, 'lest the evil spirits should rise from below:' ghee is a thunderbolt, he thus repels the evil spirits by means of the thunderbolt, and thus the evil spirits do not rise from below. Having then gone round to the front, he sits down facing the north and anoints the stake. He says (to the Hotri), 'Recite to the stake as it is anointed!'
3.7.1.11 He anoints it with, 'The divine Savitri anoint thee with sweet drink (milk)!' for Savitri is the impeller (prasavitri) of the gods, and that stake is in reality the sacrificer himself; and sweet drink is everything here; he thus puts it in connection with all that, and Savitri, the impeller, impels it for him: therefore he says, 'The divine Savitri anoint thee with sweet drink!'
3.7.1.12 Having then anointed the top-ring on both sides, he puts it on (the stake) with, 'To the full-berried plants--thee!' for that (top-ring) is as its berry. And as to its being, as it were, contracted in the middle, the berry here on trees is fastened (to the stalk) sideways; what connecting part there is between (the fruit and stalk) pressed in, as it were, that he thereby makes it. This is why it is, as it were, contracted in the middle.
3.7.1.13 He anoints from top to bottom the (corner) facing the fire; for the (corner) facing the fire is the sacrificer, and the ghee is sap: with sap he thus anoints the sacrificer; therefore he anoints from top to bottom the (corner) facing the fire. He then grasps the girding-part all round, and says (to the Hotri), 'Recite to the (stake) being set up!'
3.7.1.14 He raises it with, 'With thy crest thou hast touched the sky; with thy middle thou hast filled the air; with thy foot thou hast steadied the earth;'--the sacrificial stake being a thunderbolt, (he raises it) for the conquering of these worlds; with that thunderbolt he gains these worlds, and deprives his enemies of their share in these worlds.
3.7.1.15 He then plants it (in the hole) with (Vâg. S. VI, 3), 'To what resorts of thine we long to go where are the swift-footed, many-horned kine; there, forsooth, was imprinted wide-striding Vishnu's highest mighty foot-step.' With this trishtubh verse he plants it; the trishtubh is a thunderbolt, as the sacrificial stake is a thunderbolt; therefore he plants it with a trishtubh verse.
3.7.1.16 That (corner which was) facing the fire he places opposite the fire; for the (corner) facing the fire is the sacrificer, and the sacrifice is fire. Hence were he to turn the fire-corner aside from the fire, the sacrificer would assuredly turn aside from the sacrifice; therefore he places the (corner which was) facing the fire opposite the fire. He then heaps up (earth) round it and presses it firmly all round, and pours water thereon.
3.7.1.17 Thereupon he makes (the sacrificer) say while touching it (Vâg. S. VI, 4; Rig-veda I, 22, 19), 'See ye the deeds of Vishnu, whereby he beheld the sacred ordinances, Indra's allied friend!' For he who has set up the sacrificial stake has hurled the thunderbolt: 'See ye Vishnu's conquest!' he means to say when he says, 'See ye the deeds of Vishnu, whereby he beheld the sacred ordinances, Indra's allied friend.' Indra, forsooth, is the deity of the sacrifice, and the sacrificial stake belongs to Vishnu; he thereby connects it with Indra; therefore he says, 'Indra's allied friend.'
3.7.1.18 He then looks up at the top-ring with (Vâg. S. VI, 5; Rig-veda I, 22, 20), 'The wise ever behold that highest step of Vishnu, fixed like an eye in the heaven.' For he who has set up the sacrificial stake has hurled the thunderbolt: 'See ye that conquest of Vishnu!' he means to say when he says, 'The wise ever behold that highest step of Vishnu, fixed like an eye in the heaven.'
3.7.1.19 He then girds (the stake with a rope of kusa-grass). Now it is to cover its nakedness that he girds it; wherefore he girds it in this place (viz. on a level with the sacrificer's navel), for it is thus that this (nether) garment is (slung round) 1. He thereby puts food into him, for it is there that the food settles; therefore he girds it at that place.
3.7.1.20 He girds it with a triple (rope), for threefold is food, and food means cattle; and (there is) the father and the mother, and what is born is the third; therefore he girds it with a triple (rope).
3.7.1.21 He girds it with (Vâg. S. VI, 6), 'Thou art enfolded; may the heavenly hosts enfold thee! may riches enfold this sacrificer among men!' He invokes a blessing on the sacrificer, when he says, 'May riches enfold this sacrificer among men.'
3.7.1.22 Thereupon he inserts a chip of the stake (under the rope) with, 'Thou art the son of the sky.' For it is doubtless the offspring of that (sacrificial stake); hence if there be the full number of eleven stakes 1, let him insert in each its own (chip) without confounding them; and his offspring is born orderly and not foolish. But whosoever inserts them in confusion, not its own in each, verily his offspring is born disorderly and foolish; therefore let him insert its own in each without confounding them.
3.7.1.23 Moreover, that chip of the stake is made an ascent to the heavenly world; there is this girdle-rope; after the rope the chip of the stake; after the chip of the stake the top-ring; and from the top-ring one reaches the heavenly world.
3.7.1.24 And as to why it is called svaru ('very sore'),--that (chip) is cut off from that (stake), and thus is its own (sva) sore (arus); therefore it is called 'svaru.'
3.7.1.25 With that part of it which is dug in, he gains the world of the Fathers; and with what is above the dug-in part, up to the girdle-rope, he gains the world of men; and with what is above the rope, up to the top-ring, he gains the world of the gods; and what (space of) two or three fingers’ breadths there is above the top-ring,--the gods called the 'Blessed 1,'--their world he therewith gains; verily, whosoever thus knows this, he becomes one of the same world with the blessed gods.
3.7.1.26 That (sacrificial stake) he sets up on the fore-part (of the altar); for the stake is a thunderbolt, as the club is a thunderbolt. But in hurling the club one takes hold of its fore-part; and that (stake) is the fore-part of the sacrifice; therefore he sets it up on the fore-part (of the altar).
3.7.1.27 Verily, by means of the sacrifice the gods gained that supreme authority which they now wield. They spake, 'How may this (world) of ours be made unattainable to men?' They sipped the sap of the sacrifice, as bees would suck out honey, and having drained the sacrifice and scattered it by means of the sacrificial stake, they disappeared. And because they scattered (yopaya) therewith, therefore it is called yûpa (sacrificial stake). At the head stands intelligence, at the head swiftness of thought; therefore he sets it up on the fore-part (of the altar).
3.7.1.28 It is eight-cornered; for the gâyatrî  metre consists of eight syllables, and the gâyatrî is the fore-part of the sacrifice, as this (stake) is the forepart of the sacrifice; therefore it is eight-cornered.
3.7.1.29 Now the gods once threw it after (the prastara into the fire) even as now some throw it after, thinking, 'So the gods did it.' Thereupon the Rakshas sipped the sacrifice (Soma) after (the gods).
3.7.1.30 The gods said unto the Adhvaryu, 'Offer thou only a chip of the stake; thereby this (sacrificer) will be bid good-speed 1; and thus the Rakshas will not hereafter sip the sacrifice, thinking, "that (stake) surely is a raised thunderbolt."'
3.7.1.31 The Adhvaryu, then, offered up only a chip of the stake, and thereby that (sacrificer) was bid good-speed; and thus the Rakshas did not thereafter sip the sacrifice, thinking, 'that surely is a raised thunderbolt.'
3.7.1.32 And in like manner does he now only offer up that chip of the sacrificial stake 2; thereby this (sacrificer) is bid good-speed; and thus the Rakshas do not thereafter sip the sacrifice, thinking, 'that surely is a raised thunderbolt!' He offers it 3 with the text (Vâg. S. VI, 21), 'May thy smoke rise up to the sky, thy light to the heavens! fill the earth with ashes, Hail!'
3.7.2.1 Verily, as large as the altar is, so large is the earth. The sacrificial stakes are thunderbolts; and by means of these thunderbolts he obtains possession of this earth, and excludes his enemies from sharing therein. Hence there are eleven stakes, and the twelfth lies aside rough-hewn; he puts it down south (of the altar). The reason why the twelfth lies aside is this.
3.7.2.2 Now the gods, while performing this sacrifice, were afraid of an attack from the Asura-Rakshas. Those raised (sacrificial stakes), then, were as a discharged arrow,--therewith one either smites or smites not; as a hurled club,--therewith one either smites or smites not. But that twelfth (stake) lying aside,--even as an arrow drawn but not discharged, as (a weapon) raised but not hurled, so was that a thunderbolt raised for repelling the evil spirits on the south; therefore the twelfth (stake) lies aside.
3.7.2.3 He lays it down with (Vâg. S. VI, 6), 'This is thy place on earth; thine is the beast of the forest.' There are the animal (victim) and the sacrificial stake; to this one he thereby assigns of animals that of the forest, and thus it, too, is possessed of an animal (victim). That setting up of the eleven sacrificial stakes is said to be of two kinds,--some, namely, set (them all) up (on the previous day) for the morrow's Soma feast, and others set up (one) stake for the preparation 1 of the morrow's Soma feast.
3.7.2.4 Let him, however, not do this; but let him only set up the one opposite the fire. For after setting it up the Adhvaryu does not quit his hold of it till the girding; but those (others) remain ungirt during that night. Thus there would be an offence, since it is for the victim that the stake is set up, and the victim is (only) slaughtered on the next morning: let him therefore set up (the others) on the next morning.
3.7.2.5 Let him first set up that (stake) which stands (immediately) north of the one opposite the fire, then the one on the south, then a northern one,--last of all the one on the southern flank: thus it (the row of stakes) inclines to the north.
3.7.2.6 But they also say conversely 1, 'Let him first set up that which is south of the one opposite the fire, then the northern one, then a southern one,--last of all the one on the northern flank: and thus indeed his work attains completion towards the north.'
3.7.2.7 Let the largest be the one forming the southern flank; then shorter and shorter; and the one forming the northern flank the shortest: thus (the row of stakes) inclines to the north.
3.7.2.8 Thereupon they set up the wife-stake for the wives. It is for the sake of completeness, forsooth, that the wife-stake is set up: there they seize (and bind) the victim for Tvashtri, for Tvashtri fashions the cast seed, and hence he fashions the seed now cast. It (the victim to Tvashtri) is an animal with testicles, for such a one is a begetter. Let him not slay that one, but let him set it free after fire has been carried round it. Were he to slay it, there would assuredly be an end to offspring, but in this way he sets free the offspring. Therefore let him not slay it, but let him set it free after fire has been carried round it.


----
3.7.3.1 There are both an animal and a sacrificial stake, for never do they immolate an animal without a stake. And as to why this is so:--well, animals did not at first submit thereto that they should become food, as they are now become food; for just as man here walks two-footed and erect, so did they walk two-footed and erect.

3.7.3.2 Then the gods perceived that thunderbolt, to wit, the sacrificial stake; they raised it, and from fear thereof they (the animals) shrunk together and thus became four-footed, and thus became food, as they are now become food, for they submitted thereto: wherefore they immolate the animal only at a stake and never without a stake.

3.7.3.3 Having driven up the victim, and churned the fire, he binds it (to the stake). And as to why this is so:--well, animals did not at first submit thereto that they should become sacrificial food, as they are now become sacrificial food and are offered up in the fire. The gods secured them: even thus secured they did not resign themselves.

3.7.3.4 They spake, 'Verily, these (animals) know not the manner of this, that it is in fire that sacrificial food is offered, nor (do they know) that secure resort (the fire): let us offer fire into the fire after securing the animals and churning the fire, and they will know that this truly is the manner of sacrificial food, this its resort; that it is truly in fire that sacrificial food is offered: and accordingly they will resign themselves, and will be favourably disposed to the slaughtering.'

3.7.3.5 Having, then, first secured the animals, and churned the fire, they offered fire into the fire; and then they (the animals) knew that this truly is the manner of sacrificial food, this its resort; that it is truly in fire that sacrificial food is offered. And accordingly they resigned themselves, and became favourably disposed to the slaughtering.

3.7.3.6 And in like manner does he now offer fire into the fire, after securing the animal and churning the fire. It (the animal) knows that this truly is the manner of sacrificial food, this its resort; that it is truly in fire that sacrificial food is offered; and accordingly it resigns itself and becomes favourably disposed to the slaughtering. Therefore having driven up the victim and churned the fire, he binds it (to the stake).

3.7.3.7 As to this they say, 'Let him not drive up (the victim), nor churn the fire; but having taken the rope and straightway gone thither and put (the rope) round it, let him bind it.' Let him, however, not do this; for it would be as if he intended to commit secretly some lawless action. Let him therefore go round there.

3.7.3.8 Then, taking a straw, he drives it up, thinking, 'having a companion, I will secure it;' for he who has a companion is strong.

3.7.3.9 He takes the straw with (Vâg. S. VI, 7), 'Thou art a cheerer!' for a companion does cheer one: therefore he says, 'Thou art a cheerer.' 'The celestial hosts have approached the gods;' the celestial hosts, forsooth, are those beasts: 'they have submitted to the gods' he means to say, when he says, 'The celestial hosts have approached the gods.'

3.7.3.10 'The considerate 1, best of leaders;' for the gods are wise: therefore he says, 'The considerate, best of leaders.'

3.7.3.11 'O divine Tvashtri, settle the wealth!' for Tvashtri is lord of beasts (cattle), and wealth means cattle, it is with regard to those which did not submit that the gods then said to Tvashtri, 'Quiet them,' when he says, 'O divine Tvashtri, settle the wealth!'

3.7.3.12 'May the offerings be relished by thee!' Since they themselves submitted thereto that they should become sacrificial food, therefore he says, 'May the offerings be relished by thee!'

3.7.3.13 'Rejoice, ye prosperous!' for cattle are prosperous: therefore he says, 'Rejoice ye prosperous.' 'O Lord of prayer, preserve our goods!' The Lord of prayer, forsooth, is the Brahman; and goods mean cattle: those, which did not submit, the gods on that occasion enclosed with the Brahman on the farther side, and they did not pass over it. And in like manner does he now enclose them with the Brahman on the farther side, and they do not pass over it: therefore he says, 'O Lord of prayer, preserve our goods!' Having made a noose he throws it over (the victim) 2. Now then as to the binding itself.


3.7.4.1 Having made a noose, he throws it over (the victim) with (Vâg. S. VI, 8), 'With the noose of sacred order I bind thee, O oblation to the gods!' for that rope, forsooth, is Varuna's: therefore he thus binds it with the noose of sacred order, and thus that rope of Varuna does not injure it.

3.7.4.2 'Be bold, O man 1!' for at first man dared not 2 to approach it (the victim); but now that he thus binds it with the noose of sacred order, as an oblation to the gods, man dares to approach it: therefore he says, 'Be bold, O man!'

3.7.4.3 He then binds it (to the stake) with (Vâg. S. VI, 9), 'At the impulse of the divine Savitri, I bind thee with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pûshan, thee agreeable to Agni and Soma!' Even as on that occasion 3, when taking out an oblation for a deity, he assigns it, so does he now assign it to the two deities. He then sprinkles it,--one and the same, forsooth, is the significance of sprinkling: he thereby makes it sacrificially pure.

3.7.4.4 He sprinkles with, 'For the waters--thee, for the plants!' whereby it (the victim) exists, thereby he thus makes it sacrificially pure. For when it rains, then plants are produced here on earth; and by eating plants and drinking water that sap originates, and from sap seed, and from seed beasts: hence whereby it exists, wherefrom it springs, thereby he thus makes it sacrificially pure.

3.7.4.5 'May thy mother grant thee permission, and thy father--;' for it is from its mother and father that it is born: hence wherefrom it is born, thereby he thus makes it sacrificially pure; '--thine own brother, thy fellow in the herd;' whereby he means to say, 'whatever kin there is of thine, with their approval I slay thee.' 'I sprinkle thee, agreeable to Agni and Soma;' he thus makes it pure for those two deities for whom he slays it.

3.7.4.6 With (Vâg. S. VI, 10), 'Thou art a drinker of water,' he then holds (the lustral water) under (its mouth), whereby he renders it internally pure. He then sprinkles it underneath (the body), with, 'May the divine waters make it palatable, a true palatable offering to the gods!' he thus makes it sacrificially pure all over.

3.7.4.7 Thereupon he says (to the Hotri), 'Recite to the fire being kindled!' when he has made the second libation of ghee 1, and returned (to his former place) without letting the two spoons touch one another 2, he anoints the victim with the (ghee in the) guhû, For the second libation is the head of the sacrifice, and the sacrifice here indeed is that victim: hence he thereby puts the head on the sacrifice and therefore anoints the victim with the guhû.

3.7.4.8 With 'May thy breath unite with the wind!' he anoints it on the forehead; with 'Thy limbs with those worthy of sacrifice' on the shoulders; with 'The lord of sacrifice with (the object of) his prayer!' the loins; whereby he means to say, 'For whatsoever object the animal is slain, do thou obtain that!'

3.7.4.9 For, indeed, the breath of the victim when slain here passes into the wind: 'Obtain thou that thy breath may pass into the wind!' is what he thereby means to say. 'Thy limbs with those worthy of offering' he says, because it is with its limbs that they sacrifice: 'Obtain thou that they may sacrifice with thy limbs' is what he thereby means to say. 'The lord of sacrifice with his prayer,' hereby they invoke a blessing on the sacrificer: 'Obtain thou that through thee they may invoke a blessing on the sacrificer' is what he thereby means to say. He then deposits the two spoons and calls for the Sraushat with a view to the Pravara (election of the Hotri) 1. The significance of this is the same (as before).

3.7.4.10 Thereupon he calls a second time for the Sraushat, for on this occasion there are two Hotris it is with regard to the Maitrâvaruna 2 that he now calls for the Sraushat. But it is the sacrificer whom he chooses, saying, 'Verily, Agni is the leader of the divine hosts,' for Agni is the head of the deities; wherefore he says, 'Verily, Agni is the leader of the divine hosts;'--'this sacrificer of the human;' for that community wherein he sacrifices is behind (inferior to) him; wherefore he says, 'This sacrificer (is the head) of the human.' 'May the household of these two shine brightly, not (like a cart yoked) with one bullock, for a hundred winters,--two yoke-fellows!' whereby he means to say, 'May their household matters be free from calamities for a hundred years 1.'

3.7.4.11 'Uniting blessings, not uniting bodies;' whereby he means to say, 'Unite ye your blessings only, but not also your bodies;' for were they also to unite their bodies, Agni (the fire) would burn the sacrificer. Now when this one sacrifices in the fire, he gives gifts to Agni; and whatever blessing the priests here invoke upon the sacrificer, all that Agni accomplishes. Thus they unite only their blessings, but not also their bodies: wherefore he says, 'Uniting blessings, not uniting bodies.'

3.8.1.1 Thereupon the Hotri, having sat down on the Hotri's seat whereon he sits down after being chosen, urges, and thus urged the Adhvaryu takes the two spoons.

3.8.1.2 They then proceed with the Âprî (verses). The reason why they proceed with the Âprîs is this. With his whole mind, with his whole self, forsooth, he who consecrates himself prepares and endeavours to prepare the sacrifice. His self is, as it were, emptied out; with those Âprîs they fill it again; and because they fill 1 it therewith, therefore they are called Âprî. For this reason they proceed with the Âprîs.

3.8.1.3 Now there are here eleven fore-offerings; for here in man there are ten vital airs, and the eleventh is the self wherein those vital airs are contained; this is the whole man; thus they fill his whole self, and therefore there are eleven fore-offerings.

3.8.1.4 [The Adhvaryu] having called (on the Âgnîdhra) for the Sraushat, he says (to the Maitrâvaruna), 'Prompt (the Hotri to recite to) the kindling-sticks 2!' Thus he proceeds with ten fore-offerings, saying, 'Prompt . . .' at each, and pouring the ghee together at every fourth fore-offering 1. Having performed ten fore-offerings, he says, 'Bring the slayer!' 'Slayer,' namely, the (butcher's) knife is called.

3.8.1.5 He then takes the (svaru) chip of the sacrificial stake, and having anointed both (the slaughtering-knife and the chip) at the top (with ghee) from the guhû-spoon, he touches the forehead of the victim with them, saying (Vâg. S. VI, 11), 'Anointed with ghee, protect ye the animals!' for the chip of the stake is a thunderbolt, and the slaughtering-knife is a thunderbolt, and ghee is a thunderbolt; having thus fitted together the entire thunderbolt 2 he appoints it the keeper of this (victim), lest the evil spirits should injure it. He again conceals the chip of the stake (under the girding-rope of the stake). In handing the slaughtering-knife to the butcher, he says, 'Be this thine approved edge!' and deposits the two spoons.

3.8.1.6 Thereupon he says (to the Hotri), 'Recite to Agni circumambient 3!' Having taken a firebrand, the Agnîdh carries the fire round (the victim). Why he carries the fire round, is that he encircles it (the victim) by means of the fire with an unbroken fence, lest the evil spirits should seize upon it; for Agni is the repeller of the Rakshas; therefore he carries the fire round. He carries it round the place where they cook it (the victim 1).

3.8.1.7 As to this they say, 'Let him take back that firebrand (to the Âhavanîya); and having there (at the Sâmitra) churned out a new fire, let them cook it (the victim) thereon. For this (firebrand), surely, is âhavanîya (fit to offer upon); it is not for the purpose that they should cook uncooked (food) thereon, but for this that they should sacrifice cooked (food) thereon.'

3.8.1.8 Let him, however, not do this. For in that he carries fire round it, it (the victim) becomes as food swallowed by that (firebrand), and it would be as if he were to seize and tear out food that has been swallowed and offer it to some one else; let them, therefore, crumble some coals off that same firebrand, and thereon cook that (victim).

3.8.1.9 Thereupon the Agnîdh, taking a (new) firebrand, walks in front: whereby he places Agni in front, thinking, 'Agni shall repel the evil spirits in front!' and they lead the victim after him (to the slaughtering-place) on a (way) free from danger and injury. The Pratiprasthâtri holds on to it from behind by means of the two spits 1, and the Adhvaryu (holds on to) the Pratiprasthâtri, and the Sacrificer to the Adhvaryu.

3.8.1.10 As to this they say, 'That (victim) must not be held on to by the sacrificer, for they lead it unto death; therefore let him not hold on to it.' But let him nevertheless hold on to it; for that (victim) which they lead to the sacrifice they lead not to death; therefore let him hold on to it. Moreover he would cut himself off from the sacrifice, were he not to hold on to it; therefore let him hold on to it. It is held on to in a mysterious way; by means of the spits the Pratiprasthâtri (holds on to it); to the Pratiprasthâtri the Adhvaryu, to the Adhvaryu the Sacrificer; thus then it is held on to in a mysterious way.

3.8.1.11 Thereupon the Adhvaryu takes two stalks of grass from the covered altar, and having called for the Sraushat, he says (to the Maitrâvaruna), 'O Hotri, prompt again (the Hotri to recite for) the offerings to the gods 2!' This is what belongs to the All-gods at the animal offering.

3.8.1.12 He then makes (the Sacrificer) say the text (Vâg. S. VI, 11), 'O thou prosperous! upon the Sacrificer,'--the prosperous one, forsooth, is Speech, it is because she speaks much, that Speech is prosperous,--'bestow thou what is agreeable unto him! Approach thou,'--thereby he means to say, 'Approach thou an existence free from affliction,'--'from the wide air, along with the divine wind;' for the Rakshas moves about the air rootless and unfettered on both sides, even as man here moves about the air rootless and unfettered on both sides: he means to say, 'Meeting together with the wind, protect thou this one from the wide air,' when he says 'from the wide air, along with the divine wind.'

3.8.1.13 'Offer thou with the self of this oblation!' whereby he means to say to Speech, 'Offer thou with the soul of this unblemished oblation;'--'Unite thou with its body!' whereby he means to say to Speech, 'Unite thou with the body of this unblemished oblation!'

3.8.1.14 In front 1 of the place where they cut it up, he throws down a stalk of grass, with, 'O great one, lead the lord of sacrifice unto greater sacrifice!' he thus strews barhis (an underlayer of sacrificial grass) for it, that no sacrificial food may be spilt; whatever may now be spilt of it when it is cut up, that settles thereon and thus is not lost.

3.8.1.15 They then step back (to the altar) and sit down turning towards the Âhavanîya, 'lest they should be eye-witnesses to its being quieted (strangled).' They do not slay it on the frontal bone 2, for that is human manner; nor behind the ear, for that is after the manner of the Fathers. They either choke it by merely keeping its mouth closed, or they make a noose. Therefore he says not, 'Slay! kill!' for that is human manner, but, 'Quiet it! It has passed away!' for that is after the manner of the gods. For when he says, 'It has passed away,' then this one (the Sacrificer) passes away to the gods: therefore he says, 'It has passed away.'

3.8.1.16 When they hold it down, then, before the strangling, he offers with 'Hail, to the gods!' And when (the butcher) says, 'Quieted is the victim,' he offers with, 'To the gods, Hail!' Thus some of the gods are preceded by 'Hail,' and others followed by 'Hail;' he thereby gratifies them, and thus gratified both kinds of gods convey him to the heavenly world. These are the so-called 'paripasavya 1' oblations; he may offer them if he choose; or, if he choose, he need not mind them.

3.8.2.1 When he (the slaughterer) announces, 'The victim has been quieted!' the Adhvaryu says, 'Neshtar, lead up the lady!' The Neshtri leads up the (sacrificer's) wife bearing a vessel of water for washing the feet.

3.8.2.2 He makes her say (Vâg . S. VI, 12), 'Homage be to thee, O wide-stretched!'--the wide-stretched one, forsooth, is the sacrifice; for they stretch the sacrifice (over the sacrificial ground): hence the wide-stretched one is the sacrifice. But that wife, forsooth, is the hind-part of the sacrifice, and he wants her, thus coming forward, to propitiate the sacrifice. Thereby, then, she makes amends to that sacrifice, and thus that sacrifice does not injure her: therefore she says, 'Homage be to thee, O wide-stretched!'

3.8.2.3 'Advance, unresisted!' whereby she means to say, 'Advance on (a way) free from injury!' 'Unto the rivers of ghee, along the paths of sacred truth!' whereby she means to say, 'Unto good.' [Vâg. S. VI, 13], 'Ye divine, pure waters, carry ye (the sacrifice) to the gods, well-prepared! May we be well-prepared preparers!' Thereby she purifies the water.

3.8.2.4 Thereupon the wife cleanses with the water the (openings of the) vital airs of the victim. The reason why she thus cleanses with water the (openings of the) vital airs is this: the food of the gods is living, is immortal (ambrosia) for the immortals; but in quieting and cutting up that victim they kill it. Now the vital airs are water; hence she now puts into it those vital airs, and thus that food of the gods becomes truly living, becomes immortal for the immortals.

3.8.2.5 Then as to why it is the wife that cleanses. The wife is a woman, and from woman progeny is born here on earth; thus he causes that (creature) to be born from that woman; and therefore the wife cleanses (the victim).

3.8.2.6 With (Vâg. S. VI, 14) 'Thy speech I cleanse' she wipes the mouth; with 'Thy breath I cleanse,' the nostrils; with 'Thine eye I cleanse,' the eyes; with 'Thine organ of hearing I cleanse,' the ears; with 'Thy navel I cleanse,' that mysterious (opening of a) vital air; or with 'Thy sexual organ I cleanse;' with 'Thy hind-part I cleanse,' that (opening of a) vital air behind. Thus she puts the vital airs into it, revives it. Thereupon, holding the legs together, (she wipes them) with 'Thy feet I cleanse;' for it is on its feet chat it stands firmly; she thus makes it stand (on its feet) for the sake of a firm position.

3.8.2.7 With one half or the whole of the water that is left, he (the Adhvaryu) and the Sacrificer 1 then sprinkle it, beginning from the head; thereby they put those vital airs into it, and revive it (beginning) from that part.

3.8.2.8 Thus, wherever they wound it 2, wherever they hurt it--water being a means of soothing--there they soothe it by that means of soothing, water, there they heal it with water.

3.8.2.9 They sprinkle with (Vâg. S. VI, 15), 'May thy mind grow full! may thy speech grow full! may thy breath grow full! may thine eye grow full! may thine ear grow full!' Thus they put the vital airs into it and revive it: 'Whatever is sore, whatever hurt in thee, may that fill up and become firm.'

3.8.2.10 Thus, wherever they wound it, wherever they hurt it--water being a means of soothing--they soothe it by that means of soothing, water, there they heal it with water: 'May that become pure in thee!' thereby they render it sacrificially pure. With 'Auspicious be the days!' they pour out (the remaining water) behind the victim.

3.8.2.11 Thus, wherever they wound it, wherever they hurt it,--lest thereafter the days and nights should be inauspicious 1,--they pour out (the water) behind the victim with, 'Auspicious be the days.'

3.8.2.12 Thereupon they turn the victim over so as to lie on its back. He (the Adhvaryu) puts the (other) stalk of grass thereon, with, 'O plant, protect!' for the knife is a thunderbolt, and thus that thunderbolt, the knife, does not injure it (the victim). He then applies the edge of the knife to it (and cuts through it) with, 'Injure it not, O blade!' for the knife is a thunderbolt, and thus that thunderbolt, the knife, does not injure it.

3.8.2.13 He applies that approved edge of his, for that has been made sacrificially pure by a text 2. That which is the top part of the stalk he puts in his left hand, and that which is the bottom part he takes with his right hand.

3.8.2.14 And where he skins (the victim), and whence the blood spirts out, there he smears it (the bottom part with blood) on both ends with (Vâg. S. VI, I6), 'Thou art the Rakshas' share!' for that blood is indeed the Rakshas' share.

3.8.2.15 Having thrown it away (on the utkara), he treads on it with, 'Herewith I tread down the Rakshas! herewith I drive away the Rakshas! herewith I consign the Rakshas to the nethermost darkness!' Thus it is by means of the sacrifice that he drives away the evil spirits, the Rakshas. And as to its being rootless and severed on both sides,--rootless, forsooth, and severed on both sides, the Rakshas moves about in the air, even as man here moves about in the air rootless and severed on both sides: therefore it (the grass-end) is rootless and severed on both sides.

3.8.2.16 Thereupon they pull out the omentum, and envelop the two spits 1 therein with, 'May ye envelop heaven and earth with ghee!' whereby he endows those two, heaven and earth, with strength and sap, and puts strength and sap into them; and upon those two, thus filled with sap and affording the means of subsistence, these creatures subsist.

3.8.2.17 The two omentum-spits are made of kârshmarya wood. For when the gods in the beginning seized (slew) a victim, then, as it was drawn upwards, its sacrificial essence 2 flowed downwards, and from it sprang a tree; and because it flowed down from the (victim) as it was drawn (karsh) upwards, therefore (it became) a kârshmarya tree. With that same sacrificial essence he now perfects it, and makes it whole; therefore the two omentum-spits are of kârshmarya wood.

3.8.2.18 He cuts it (the omentum) off on all sides (from the belly) and heats it at the cooking-fire: thus it becomes cooked for him already at this (fire) 1. The Agnîdh again takes a firebrand (from the Sâmitra, and walks in front). They go behind the pit (kâtvâla) and proceed to the Âhavanîya. The Adhvaryu throws that (top part of the) grass-stalk into the Âhavanîya with, 'O Vâyu, graciously accept the drops!' for this is the kindler (samidh) of the drops 2.

3.8.2.19 Thereupon he heats the omentum while standing on the north side; for he is about to pass by the fire and to roast (the omentum) after walking round to the south side. Hereby then he propitiates it, and thus that fire does not injure him while passing by; this is why he heats the omentum while standing on the north side.

3.8.2.20 They take it along between the sacrificial stake and the fire. The reason why they do not take it across the middle (of the altar) 3, where they take other sacrificial dishes, is lest they should bring the sacrifice in the middle into contact with the uncooked (omentum). And why they do not take it there outside (the altar) along the front of the sacrificial stake, is that they would thereby put it outside the sacrifice; therefore they take it along between the sacrificial stake and the fire. Having gone round to the south side, the Pratiprasthâtri roasts it.

3.8.2.21 Thereupon the Adhvaryu, having taken ghee with the dipping-spoon, pours it upon the omentum, with, 'May Agni graciously accept the ghee, Hail!' Thus those drops thereof reach the fire after becoming cooked offerings, made with Svâhâ (hail)!

3.8.2.22 He then says (to the Maitrâvaruna 1), 'Recite to the drops!' He recites to the drops verses addressed to Agni 2. The reason why he recites to the drops verses addressed to Agni, is that rain originates from gifts made from this earth, for from here it is that Agni obtains the rain; by means of these drops (falling from the omentum) he obtains those (rain) drops, and those drops rain down; therefore he recites to the drops verses addressed to Agni. When it is roasted,--

3.8.2.23 The Pratiprasthâtri says, 'It is roasted: proceed 3!' The Adhvaryu, having taken the two spoons and stept across (to the north side of the fire) and called for the Sraushat, says (to the Maitrâvaruna), 'Prompt for the Svâhâs 4!' and offers (the ghee) when the Vashat has been pronounced. 
3.8.2.24 Having offered, he bastes first the omentum, then the clotted ghee. Now the Karaka-Adhvaryus, forsooth, baste first the clotted ghee, arguing that the clotted ghee is the breath; and a Karaka-Adhvaryu, forsooth, cursed Yâgñavalkya for so doing, saying, 'That Adhvaryu has shut out the breath; the breath shall depart from him!'

3.8.2.25 But he, looking at his arms, said, 'These hoary arms--what in the world has become of the Brâhman's word 1!' Let him not heed that (objection of the Karakas); for this is the last fore-offering,--and this being a havis-offering, at the last fore-offering he first pours ghee into the dhruvâ, being about to offer the first two butter-portions with it 2. Now, on the present occasion, he will first offer the omentum; therefore let him first baste the omentum, then the clotted ghee. And though he does not baste the victim with ghee, 'lest he should baste the uncooked,' that whole victim of his yet becomes (as it were) basted with ghee in that he bastes the omentum; let him therefore first baste the omentum, then the clotted ghee.

3.8.2.26 Thereupon he makes an 'underlayer' of ghee (in the guhû-spoon), and lays a piece of gold thereon. Then, cutting off the omentum (from the spits and putting it into the spoon), he says (to the Hotri), 'Recite (the invitatory prayer) to Agni and Soma for the omentum and fat of the buck!' He then lays (another) piece of gold on (the omentum) and bastes it twice with ghee above.

3.8.2.27 The reason why there is a piece of gold on both sides is this. When they offer the victim in the fire they slay it; and gold means immortal life: hence it (the victim) rests in immortal life. And so it rises from hence, and so it lives; for this reason there is a piece of gold 1 on both sides. Having called for the Sraushat, he says (to the Maitrâvaruna), 'Prompt (the Hotri to recite the offering-prayer 2 on) the omentum and fat of the buck for Agni and Soma!' He does not say, '. . . (the omentum and fat) brought forward;' when the Soma has been pressed he says, 'brought forward 3.' He offers when the Vashat has been pronounced.

3.8.2.28 Having offered the omentum, he lays the two spits together and throws them after (the omentum into the fire), with, 'Consecrated by Svâhâ, go ye to Ûrdhvanabhas 4, son of the Maruts!' He does so, thinking, 'Lest these two wherewith we have cooked the omentum should come to nought.'

3.8.2.29 The reason why they perform with the omen-tum is this. For whatever deity the victim is seized, that same deity he pleases by means of that fat (part); and that same deity, thus pleased with that fat, waits patiently for the other sacrificial dishes being cooked; this is why they perform with the omentum.

3.8.2.30 They then cleanse themselves over the pit. For in quieting and cutting up (the victim) they wound it; and water being a means of soothing, they now soothe it by means of water, heal it by means of water; therefore they cleanse themselves over the pit.