@text=Śvetāśvataropaniṣad
@dcs-id=366
@translator=Patrick Olivelle
@digitized-by=
@prepared-by=Oliver Hellwig
@language=English


1.1 People who make inquiries about brahman say: What is the cause of brahman? Why were we born? By what do we live? On what are we established? Governed by whom, O you who know brahman, do we live in pleasure and in pain, each in our respective situation?
1.2 Should we regard it as time, as inherent nature, as necessity, as chance, as the elements, as the source of birth, or as the Person? Or is it a combination of these? But that can't be, because there is the self (atman). Even the self is not in control, because it is itself subject to pleasure and pain.
1.3 Those who follow the discipline of meditation have seen God, the self, and the power, all hidden by their own qualities. One alone is he who governs all those causes, from "time" to "self."
1.4-5 We study it — as a wheel that is one-rimmed and threefold, with sixteen tips, fifty spokes, twenty counterspokes, and six sets of eight, whose single rope is of many forms; that divides itself into three different paths; and whose delusion regarding the one springs from two causes. as a river whose waters are the five sense organs; whose fierce crocodiles are the five sources of birth; whose waves are the five breaths; whose primal source is the five types of perception; which has five whirlpools; whose rapid current is the five types of sorrow; which divides itself in fifty ways; and which has five sections.
1.6 Within this vast wheel of brahman, on which all subsist and which abides in all, a goose keeps moving around. When he perceives himself (atman) as distinct from the impeller, delighted by that knowledge he goes from there to immortality.
1.7 This highest brahman, however, has been extolled thus: There is a triad in it — oneself, the foundation, and the imperishable. When those who know brahman have come to know the distinction between them, they become absorbed in and totally intent on brahman and are freed from the womb.
1.8 This whole world is the perishable and the imperishable, the manifest and the unmanifest joined together — and the Lord bears it, while the self (atman), who is not the Lord, remains bound, because he is the enjoyer. When he comes to know God, he is freed from all fetters
1.9 There are two unborn males—the one knows and the other is ignorant; the one is Lord and the other is not the Lord. There is just one unborn female, who is joined to the enjoyer and the objects of enjoyment. And then there is the self (atman), limitless and displaying every form, not engaged in any activity. When someone finds these three, he finds this brahman.
1.10 The primal source is perishable, while Hara is immortal and imperishable. The one God rules over both the perishable and the self (atman). By meditating onhim, by striving toward him, and,further, in the end by becoming the same reality as him, all illusion disappears.
1.11 When one has known God,all the fetters fall off; by the eradication of the blemishes, birth and death come to an end;by meditating on him,one obtains, at the dissolution of the body, a third—sovereignty over all; and in the absolute one's desires are fulfilled.
1.12 This can be known, for it abides always within one's body (atman). Higher than that there is nothing to be known. When the enjoyer discerns the object of enjoyment and the impeller—everything has been taught. That is the threefold brahman.
1.13 When a fire is contained within its womb, one cannot see its visible form and yet its essential character is not extinguished; one can grasp the fire once again from its womb by means of tinder. In just the same way, one can grasp both within the body by means of the syllable OM.
1.14 When one makes one's own body the bottom slab and the syllable OM the upper drill, by twirling it constantly through meditation one would see God,just as one would the hidden thing.
1.15-16 Like oil in sesame seeds and butter in curds, like water in the riverbed and fire in the fire-drills, so, when one seeks it with truth and austerity, one grasps that self (atman) in the body (atman)—that all-pervading self, which is contained [in the body], like butter in milk. That is brahman, the highest object of the teachings on hidden connections (upanisad), an object rooted in austerity and the knowledge of the self.

2.1 Yoking first his mind, and extending then his thoughts, Savitr, having recognized the fire as the light, brought it here from the earth.
2.2 With minds yoked, we [make the offering] under the stimulus of the god Savitr for a heavenly abode, for strength.
2.3 Yoking the gods, as they go to heaven with their mind and to the firmament with their thought, may Savitr stimulate them to create the lofty light
2.4 They yoke their minds, they yoke their thoughts, those inspired poets of the lofty poet. That one alone who knows the patterns has apportioned the offerings. Resounding is the praise of the god Savitr.
2.5 I yoke with adorations the ancient formulation (brahman) of you two. The praises spread wide, like the suns on their course. All the sons of the immortal hear them, when they have reached the heavenly abodes.
2.6 Where the fire is churned, where the wind wafts, where the Soma juice flows over—there the mind is born.
2.7 By means of Savitr and his stimulus let a man take delight in that ancient formulation (brahman). Make there a source of birth for yourself. And the gifts you have given, not even an iota, [would fall] from you [to someone else's lot].
2.8 When he keeps his body straight, with the three sections erect, and draws the senses together with the mind into his heart, a wise man shall cross all the frightful rivers with the boat consisting of that formulation (brahman).
2.9 Compressing his breaths in here and curbing his movements, a man should exhale through one nostril when his breath is exhausted. A wise man should keep his mind vigilantly under control, just as he would that wagon yoked to unruly horses.
2.10 Level and clean; free of gravel, fire, and sand; near noiseless running waters and the like; pleasing to the mind but not offensive to the eye; provided with a cave or a nook sheltered from the wind—in such a spot should one engage in yogic practice.
2.11 Mist, smoke, sun, wind, fire, fireflies, lightning, crystal, moon — these are the apparitions that, within yogic practice, precede and pave the way to the full manifestation in brahman.
2.12 When earth, water, fire, air, and ether have arisen together, and the body made up of these five becomes equipped with the attribute of yoga, that man, obtaining a body tempered by the fire of yoga, will no longer experience sickness, old age, or suffering.
2.13 Lightness, health, the absence of greed, a bright complexion, a pleasant voice, a sweet smell, and very little feces and urine—that, they say, is the first working of yogic practice.
2.14 Just as a disk smeared with clay, once it is cleaned well, shines brightly, so also an embodied person, once he has perceived the true nature of the self, becomes solitary, his goal attained and free from sorrow.
2.15 When, by means of the true nature of the self, which resembles a lamp, a man practicing yogic restraint sees here the true nature of brahman, he is freed from all fetters, because he has known God, unborn, unchanging, and unsullied by all objects.
2.16 This God does pervade all quarters. He was born the first, yet he remains within the womb. He it is, who was born; he, who will be born. His face everywhere, he stands turning west toward men.
2.17 He who abides as God in the fire; who abides in the waters; who has entered every being; who abides in the plants; who abides in the trees—to that God adoration! Adoration!

3.1 Who alone, wielding the net, reigns by his sovereign powers, reigns over all worlds by his sovereign powers; who also alone is present at their rise and birth—those who know this become immortal.
3.2 There is only one Rudra; he has not tolerated a second who would reign over these worlds by his sovereign powers. After drawing in all beings, he stands as the protector at the end of time turning west toward men.
3.3 Eyes everywhere and face everywhere, arms everywhere and feet everywhere, he forges with his two hands, he forges with the wings, producing the heaven and earth, the one God.
3.4 Who, as the source and origin of the gods and the ruler over them all, as the god Rudra, and as the great seer, in the beginning created Hiranyagarbha—may he furnish us with lucid intelligence.
3.5 That form of yours, O Rudra, which is benign and not terrifying, which is not sinister-looking—with that most auspicious form of yours, O Mountain-dweller, look upon us.
3.6 The arrow, O Mountain-dweller, that you hold in your hand to shoot—make it benign, O Mountain-protector; hurt not man or beast.
3.7 Who is higher than that, higher than brahman, the immense one hidden in all beings, in each according to its kind, and who alone encompasses the whole universe—when people know him as the Lord, they become immortal.
3.8 I know that immense Person, having the color of the sun and beyond darkness. Only when a man knows him does he pass beyond death; there is no other path for getting there.
3.9 This whole world is filled by that Person, beyond whom there is nothing; beneath whom there is nothing; smaller than whom there is nothing; larger than whom there is nothing; and who stands like a tree planted firmly in heaven.
3.10 What is higher than that is without visible appearance and free from affliction. Those who know it become immortal; as for the rest, only suffering awaits them.
3.11 Who is the face, head, and neck of all, who resides deep in the heart of all beings, and who pervades everything—he is the Blessed One. Therefore, the Benign One is present everywhere.
3.12 The Person, clearly, is the immense Lord. He is the one who sets in motion the real. The Imperishable One rules over the light, this totally flawless attainment.
3.13 The Person the size of a thumb abiding within the body (atman) always resides within the hearts of people. With the heart, with insight, with thought has he been contemplated. Those who know this become immortal.
3.14 The Person had a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, and a thousand feet. Having encompassed the earth on all sides, he extended ten fingers' breadth beyond it.
3.15 This whole world is just the Person, whatever there was and whatever there will be. Even over immortality he rules, when he rises above [the world] through food.
3.16 With hands and feet everywhere, with eyes, heads, and faces everywhere, and with ears everywhere, that remains encompassing everything in the world—
3.17 That, which appears to possess the powers of all the senses but is devoid of every sense, which is the lord, the ruler of the whole world, the vast refuge of the whole world.
3.18 Within the fort with nine gates, the embodied one flutters to the outside like a goose; it is the master of the whole world, of both the immobile and the mobile.
3.19 He moves swiftly, but he has no feet; he grasps, but he has no hands; he sees, but he has no eyes; he hears, but he has no ears. He knows what is there to know, but there is no one who knows him. They call him the first and immense Person.
3.20 Finer than the finest, larger than the largest, is the self that lies here hidden in the heart of a living being. A man who, by the creator's grace, sees that desireless one as the majesty and as the Lord will be free from sorrow.
3.21 I know that unaging and ancient one as the self in all beings, as present in all because of his pervasiveness; the one, about whom those who inquire after brahman proclaim—he always brings about the cessation of birth.

4.1 Who alone, himself without color, wielding his power creates variously countless colors, and in whom the universe comes together at the beginning and dissolves in the end—may he furnish us with lucid intelligence.
4.2 The fire is simply that; the sun is that; the wind is that; and the moon is also that! The bright one is simply that; brahman is that; the waters are that; and Prajapati is that!
4.3 You are a woman; you are a man; you are a boy or also a girl. As an old man, you totter along with a walking stick. As you are born, you turn your face in every direction.
4.4 You are the dark blue bird, the green one with red eyes, the rain-cloud, the seasons, and the oceans. You live as one without a beginning because of your pervasiveness, you, from whom all beings have been born.
4.5 One unborn male [billy goat], burning with passion, covers one unborn female [nanny goat] colored red, white, and black, and giving birth to numerous offspring with the same colors as hers, while another unborn male leaves her as soon as she has finished enjoying the pleasures.
4.6 Two birds, who are companions and friends, nestle on the very same tree. One of them eats a tasty fig; the other, not eating, looks on.
4.7 Stuck on the very same tree, one person grieves, deluded by her who is not the Lord. But when he sees the other, the contented Lord—and the Lord's majesty—his grief disappears.
4.8 The syllable amidst the Rg, the syllable upon which all the gods are seated in the highest heaven—when a man does not know it, what will he do with a Rg. Seated here together are people who do know it!
4.9 Meters, sacrifices, rites, religious observances, the past, the future, and what the Vedas proclaim—from that the illusionist creates this whole world, and in it the other remains confined by the illusory power.
4.10 One should recognize the illusory power as primal matter, and the illusionist, as the great Lord. This whole living world is thus pervaded by things that are parts of him.
4.11 Who alone presides over womb after womb; in whom this whole world comes together and dissolves—when someone recognizes that Lord who fulfills wishes as the God who is to be adored, he attains this unending peace.
4.12 Who, as the source and origin of the gods and the ruler over them all, as the god Rudra, and as the great seer, looked on as Hiranyagarbha was being born—may he furnish us with lucid intelligence.
4.13 Who is the Supreme Lord of the gods; on whom the worlds rest; who rules over the bipeds and the quadrupeds here—to what god shall we offer oblations?
4.14 Who is finer than the finest, in the midst of disorder; who is the creator of the universe displaying various forms; who, alone, encompasses the universe—when someone recognizes him as the Benign One, he attains unending peace.
4.15 It is he who protects the world at the right time, the lord of the universe hidden in all beings. When someone thus knows him, after whom seers and gods strive, he severs the fetters of death.
4.16 When someone knows the one who is extremely fine, like the spume on top of the ghee, as the Benign One hidden in all beings; when someone recognizes him, who alone encompasses the universe, as God—he is freed from all fetters.
4.17 That God, the maker of all, the immense self (atman), is always residing in the hearts of people. With the heart, with insight, with thought has he been contemplated. Those who know this become immortal.
4.18 When there was darkness, then there was neither day nor night, neither the existent nor the nonexistent—the Benign One alone was there. He was the imperishable, he was "the excellent [glory] of Savitr," and from him has come forth the ancient wisdom.
4.19 No one will catch hold of him from above, from across, or in the middle. There is no likeness of him, whose name is Immense Glory.
4.20 His appearance is beyond the range of sight; no one can see him with his sight. Those who know him thus with their hearts—him, who abides in their hearts—and with insight become immortal.
4.21 "He is the Unborn One!"—so some man, filled with awe, takes refuge with Rudra—"Protect me always with that kindly face of yours!"
4.22 "Do not hurt us in our offspring or descendants, in our life, in our cattle or horses. Do not slay in anger, O Rudra, our valiant men. Oblations in hand, we invite you to your seat."

5.1 Two things, knowledge and ignorance, are set down in the imperishable and infinite fort of brahman, where they lie hidden. Now, ignorance is the perishable and knowledge is the immortal. But the one who rules over both knowledge and ignorance is another—
5.2 who alone presides over womb after womb, and thus over all visible forms and all the sources of birth; who in the beginning carried this Kapila born of the seer together with his body of knowledge and would look on him as he was being born.
5.3 Spreading out one net after another in diverse ways within this world, this God gathers them in. After creating it once again, the Lord likewise tears it down. The immense self (atman) exercises his sovereignty over the whole world.
5.4 As the draft-ox shines, lighting up all the quarters, above, below, and across, so this God, blessed and adorable, alone rules over wombs and inherent natures.
5.5 Who, as the womb of all, not only ripens by his inherent nature, but also would bring all those in need of ripening to full development, and who would apportion all the qualities—he alone rules over this whole universe.
5.6 It is hidden in the secret Upanisads of the Veda. Recognize it, O Brahmins, as the womb of brahman. The gods of old and the seers who knew it became of one essence with it and so came to be immortal.
5.7 The one who, in association with the qualities, performs fruitful actions also enjoys the fruits of that very act. Displaying every form, endowed with the three qualities, and along three paths he roams about as the lord of vital breaths together with his own actions.
5.8 He is as large as a thumb and equal in appearance to the sun when he is equipped with the faculties of imagination and self-consciousness. But one sees also another no larger than the tip of an awl who is equipped only with the quality of intelligence and the quality of the body (atman).
5.9 When the tip of a hair is split into a hundred parts, and one of those parts further into a hundred parts—the individual soul (jiva), on the one hand, is the size of one such part, and, on the other, it partakes of infinity.
5.10 It is neither a woman nor a man, nor even a hermaphrodite; it is ruled over by whichever body it obtains.
5.11 The birth and growth of the body (atman) takes place through the offerings of intention, touch, and sight, and by means of food, drink, and impregnation; whereas the embodied self assumes successively in different situations the physical appearances that correspond to its actions.
5.12 The embodied self assumes numerous physical appearances, both large and small, in accordance with its qualities. One sees also another cause of their union in accordance with the qualities of the actions and the body (atman).
5.13 Who is without beginning or end, in the midst of disorder; who is the creator of the universe displaying various forms; who, alone, encompasses the universe— when someone recognizes him as God, he is freed from all fetters.
5.14 Who is to be grasped with one's heart, who is called "Without-a-Lord," who brings about existence and nonexistence, who is the Benign One, and who produces both the creation and its constituent parts—those who know him as God have cast aside their bodies.

6.1 Some wise men say it is inherent nature, while others say it is time—all totally deluded. It is rather the greatness of God present in the world by means of which this wheel of brahman goes around.
6.2 Who always encompasses this whole world—the knower, the architect of time, the one without qualities, and the all-knowing one—it is at his command that the work of creation, to be conceived of as earth, water, fire, air, and space, unfolds itself.
6.3 After completing that work and drawing it back again; after joining himself with the realities one after another—with one, with two, with three, or with eight, as well as with time and with the subtle qualities of the body (atman);
6.4 and after undertaking the works endowed with the qualities; he who would apportion all the modes of existence—when they are no more, the work he has produced is destroyed—he carries on, when the work is dissolved, as someone other than those realities.
6.5-6 One sees him as the beginning, as the basis and cause of the joining, as beyond the three times, and also as without parts. He, from whom the unfolding of the world has come forth, is higher than and different from the time-confined forms of the tree. After we have first venerated that adorable God displaying every form, the source of all beings, as residing within one's heart, and then recognized him as the one who bestows righteousness and removes evil, as the Lord of prosperity, as abidingwithin ourselves (atman), as the Immortal residing in all beings—
6.7 we will find this highest Great-Lord among lords, the highest God among gods, the highest master among masters, the God beyond the highest as the adorable Lord of the universe.
6.8 One cannot find in him either an obligation to act or an organ with which to act; neither can one see anyone equal to him, let alone someone who surpasses him. One hears about his highest and truly diverse power, which is part of his very nature and is the working of his knowledge and strength.
6.9 There is no one in the world who is his master, nor anyone who rules over him. He has no distinguishing mark. He is the cause, the Overlord over the overlords of the sense organs, and he has neither parent nor overlord.
6.10 The one God who covers himself with things issuing from the primal source, from his own inherent nature, as a spider, with the threads—may he procure us dissolution in brahman.
6.11 The one God hidden in all beings, pervading the universe, the inner self of all beings, the overseer of the work, dwelling in all beings, the witness, the avenger, alone, devoid of qualities;
6.12 the one controller of the many who are inactive, who makes the single seed manifold—the wise who perceive him as abiding within themselves (atman), they alone, not others, enjoy eternal happiness.
6.13 The changeless, among the changing, the intelligent, among intelligent beings, the one, who dispenses desires among the many — when a man knows that cause, which is to be comprehended through the application of Samkhya, as God, he is freed from all fetters.
6.14 There the sun does not shine, nor the moon and stars; there lightning does not shine, of this common fire need we speak! Him alone, as he shines, do all things reflect; this whole world radiates with his light.
6.15 He is the one goose in the middle of this universe. He himself resides as fire within the ocean. Only when a man knows him does he pass beyond death; there is no other path for getting there.
6.16 He is the creator of all; the knower of all; his own source of birth; the knower; the architect of time; the one without qualities; the one with all knowledge; the Lord of both the primal source and of individual souls; the ruler over the qualities; and the cause of liberation from, remaining within, and bondage to the rebirth cycle.
6.17 He who is one with him, immortal, abiding as the Lord, the knower, present everywhere, and the protector of this universe—he rules this living world eternally. There is no other cause to becoming the Lord.
6.18 Who at first created the brahman and delivered to him the Vedas; who manifests himself by his own intelligence—in that God do I, desirous of liberation, seek refuge—
6.19 in him, who, like a fire whose fuel is spent, is without parts, inactive, tranquil, unblemished, spotless, and the highest dike to immortality.
6.20 Only when people will be able to roll up the sky like a piece of leather will suffering come to an end, without first knowingGod.
6.21 By the power of his austerities and by the grace of God, the wise Svetasvatara first came to know brahman and then proclaimed it to those who had passed beyond their order of life as the highest means of purification that brings delight to the company of seers.
6.22 This supreme secret was proclaimed during a former age in the Vedanta. One should never disclose it to a person who is not of a tranquil disposition, or who is not one's son or pupil.
6.23 Only in a man who has the deepest love for God, and who shows the same love toward his teacher as toward God, do these points declared by the Noble One shine forth.