@text=Vājasaneyīsaṃhitā
@dcs-id=523
@translator=Griffith
@digitized-by=sacred-texts.com
@prepared-by=Oliver Hellwig
@language=English

3.1 Serve Agni with the kindling-brand, with drops of butter wake the Guest. In him pay offerings to the Gods.
3.2 To Agni Jâtavedas, to the flame, the well-enkindled God, Offer thick sacrificial oil.
3.3 Thee, such, O Angiras, with brands and sacred oil we magnify, O very brilliant, Youthfullest.
3.4 Rich in oblations, dropping oil, to thee, sweet Agni, let them go. Accept with favour these my brands.
3.5 Earth! Ether! Sky! Like heaven in plenty and like earth in compass! Upon thy back, Earth, place of sacrificing to Gods, for gain of food I lay food-eating Agni.
3.6 This spotted Bull hath come and sat before the Mother and before The Father, mounting up to heaven. 
3.7 As expiration from his breath his radiance penetrates within: The Bull shines out through all the sky.
3.8 He rules supreme through thirty realms. Song is bestowed upon the Bird Throughout the days at break of morn.
3.9 Agni is light, and light is Agni. Hail! Sûrya is light, and light is Sûrya. Hail! Agni is splendour, light is splendour. Hail! Sûrya is splendour, light is splendour. Hail! Light is Sûrya, Sûrya is light. Hail!
3.10 Accordant with bright Savitar and Night with Indra at her side, May Agni, being pleased, enjoy. All-hail!
3.11 Approaching sacrifice, may we pronounce a text to Agni who Heareth us even when afar.
3.12 Agni is head and height of heaven, the Master of the earth is he: He quickeneth the waters’ seed.
3.13 You two will I invoke, O Indra-Agni, will please you both together with oblation. Givers, you twain, of vigorous strength and riches, you twain do I invoke for gain of vigour.
3.14 This is thine ordered place of birth whence, sprung to life, thou shonest forth. Knowing this, Agni, rise thou up and cause our riches to increase.
3.15 Here by ordainers was this God appointed first Invoker, best at worship, to be praised at rites, Whom Apnavâna and the Bhrigus caused to shine, bright-coloured in the wood, spreading to every house.
3.16 After his ancient splendour they, the bold, have drawn the bright milk from The Sage who wins a thousand gifts.
3.17 Thou, Agni, art our bodies’ guard. Guard thou my body. Giver of life art thou, O Agni. Give me life. Giver of splendour art thou, Agni. Give me splendour. All that is wanting in my body, Agni, supply for me.
3.18 Enkindled we enkindle thee through hundred winters, thee the bright; We healthy, thee who givest health; we strong, thee author of our strength; We, never injured, Agni, thee uninjured injurer of foes. O rich in shining lights, may I in safety rich the end of thee.
3.19 Thou hast attained, O Agni, to the splendour of Sûrya, to the eulogy of Rishis, and to the habitation which thou lovest. May I attain to lengthened life, to splendour, to offspring and abundant store of riches.
3.20 Ye are food, may I enjoy your food. Ye are might, may I enjoy your might. Ye are energy, may I enjoy your energy. Ye are abundant riches, may I enjoy your abundant riches.
3.21 Sport, wealthy ones, in this abode, this fold, this spot, this dwelling-place. Remain just here, and go not hence.
3.22 Composed art thou of every form and colour. With sap and. ownership of kine approach me. To thee, dispeller of the night, O Agni, day by day with prayer, Bringing thee reverence, we come; 
3.23 Ruler of sacrifices, guard of Law eternal, radiant One, Increasing in thine own abode.
3.24 Be to us easy of approach, even as a father to his son: Agni, be with us for our weal.
3.25 O Agni, be our nearest Friend; be thou a kind deliverer and gracious Friend. Excellent Agni, come thou nigh to us, and give us wealth most splendidly renowned.
3.26 To thee then, O most bright, O radiant God, we come with prayer for happiness for our friends. So hear us, listen to this call of ours, and keep us far from every evil man.
3.27 O Ida, come, O Aditi, come hither. Come hither, much-desired! From you may I obtain my heart's desire.
3.28 O Brahmanaspati, make him who presses Soma glorious, Even Kakshîvân Ausija.
3.29 The rich, the healer of disease, who findeth wealth, increaseth store, The prompt,—may he be with us still.
3.30 Let not the foeman's curse, let not a mortal's treachery fall on us: Preserve us, Brahmanaspati!
3.31 Great, heavenly, unassailable, ours be the favour of the Three, Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna.
3.32 For over them, neither at home nor upon pathways perilous, The evil-minded foe hath power.
3.33 For they, the Sons of Aditi, bestow eternal light upon A mortal man that he may live. 
3.34 Ne’er art thou fruitless, Indra, ne’er dost thou forsake thy worshipper. But now. O Liberal Lord, thy bounty as a God is ever poured forth more and more.
3.35 May we attain that excellent glory of Savitar the God: So may he stimulate our prayers.
3.36 May thine inviolable car wherewith thou guardest worshippers Come near to us from every side.
3.37 Earth! Ether! Sky! May I be rich in offspring, well-manned with men and opulent with riches. Friendly to men! do thou protect my offspring. Worthy of praise! do thou protect my cattle. O pointed One, protect the food that feeds me.
3.38 We have approached the Omniscient, best finder-out of wealth for us. Splendour and strength bestow on us, O Agni, thou Imperial Lord.
3.39 Lord of the Home, this Agni Gârhapatya is best at finding riches for our children. Splendour and strength bestow on us, O Agni, Master of the Home.
3.40 Rich, furtherer of plenty is this Agni, Master-of the Herd. Splendour and strength bestow on us, O Agni, Master of the Herd.
3.41 Fear not, nor tremble thou, O House. To thee who bearest strength we come. I, bearing strength, intelligent and happy, come to thee, House, rejoicing in my spirit.
3.42 The home on which the wanderer thinks, where cheerfulness and joy abound We call the Home to welcome us. May it know us who know it well.
3.43 Here have the cows been called to us, the goats and sheep have been called near, And in our home we have addressed the meath that sweeteneth our food. I come to thee for safety and for quiet. May joy be ours, felicity, and blessing.
3.44 We invocate the Maruts, the voracious, eaters of their foes, Delighting in their mess of meal.
3.45 We expiate by sacrifice each sinful act that we have done, Whether in village or the wild, in company or corporeal sense. Svâhâ!
3.46 Let us not here contend with Gods, O Indra, for, Fierce One! here is thine own sacred portion, Thine, Mighty One, whose friends, the bounteous Maruts, his song who pours oblation, streamlike, honours.
3.47 The skilful workers have performed their work with voice that gives delight. Having performed the work for Gods, go, ye companions, to your home.
3.48 O ever-moving Cleansing Bath, thou movest gliding on thy way. With Gods may I wash out the sin that I have sinned against the Gods, with men the sin against mankind. Preserve me safe from injury, O God, from him who loudly roars.
3.49 Full, fly away, O spoon, and filled completely fly thou back to us. O Satakratu, let us twain barter, like goods, our food and strength.
3.50 Give me, I give thee gifts: bestow on me, and I bestow on thee. To me present thy merchandize, and I to thee will give my wares.
3.51 Well have they eaten and regaled: the friends have risen and passed away. The sages, luminous in themselves, have praised thee with their latest hymn. Now, Indra, yoke thy two Bay Steeds.
3.52 Thee will we reverence, thee, O Lord of Bounty, who art fair to see. Thus praised, according to our wish come now with richly-laden car. Now, Indra, yoke thy two Bay Steeds.
3.53 We call the spirit hither with a hero-celebrating strain, Yea, with the Fathers’ holy hymns.
3.54 The spirit comes to us again for wisdom, energy, and life, That we may long behold the Sun.
3.55 O Fathers, may the Heavenly Folk give us the spirit once again, That we may be with those who live. 
3.56 O Soma, with the spirit still within us, blest with progeny, May we be busied in thy law.
3.57 O Rudra, this is thine allotted portion. With Ambikâ thy sister kindly take it. This, Rudra, is thy share, the rat thy victim.
3.58 We have contented Rudra, yea, put off Tryambaka the God, That he may make us wealthier, may make us yet more prosperous, may make us vigorous to act.
3.59 Thou art a healing medicine, a balm for cow and horse and man, a happiness to ram and ewe.
3.60 Tryambaka we worship, sweet augmenter of prosperity. As from its stem a cucumber, may I be freed from bonds of death, not reft of immortality. We worship him, Tryambaka, the husband-finder, sweet to smell. As from its stem a cucumber, hence and not thence may I be loosed.
3.61 This, Rudra, is thy food: with this depart beyond the Mûjavâns. With bow unstrung, with muffled staff, clothed in a garment made of skin, gracious, not harming us, depart.
3.62 May Jamadagni's triple life, the triple life of Kasyapa, The triple life of Deities—may that same triple life be ours.
3.63 Gracious, thy name; the thunder is thy father. Obeisance be to thee: forbear to harm me. I shave thee for long life, for food to feed thee, for progeny, for riches in abundance, for noble children, for heroic vigour.


6.1 By impulse of God Savitar I take thee with arms of Asvins, with the hands of Pûshan. Thou art a woman. Here I cut the necks of Râkshasas away. Barley art thou. Bar off from us our haters, bar our enemies. Thee for heaven, thee for earth, thee for the welkin. Pure be the worlds, the Fathers’ dwelling-places. Thou art the habitation of the Fathers.
6.2 Thou art a leader, easy, to Unnetars, of access. Know this. It will stand upon thee. Savitar, God, anoint thee with sweet butter. Thee for the plants laden with goodly fruitage! Thou with thy top hast touched the sky, hast with thy middle filled the air, and steadied with thy base the earth.
6.3 Those seats of thine which we desire to visit, where there are many-horned and nimble. oxen, There, of a truth, was mightily imprinted the loftiest step of widely-striding Vishnu. I close thee in, the winner of the Brâhmans, winner of Nobles and abundant riches. Strengthen the Brâhmans, strengthen thou the Nobles, strengthen our vital power, strengthen our offspring.
6.4 Look ye on Vishnu's works, whereby the Friend of Indra, close-allied, Hath let his holy ways be seen.
6.5 The princes evermore behold that loftiest place where Vishnu is, Laid as it were an eye in heaven.
6.6 Thou art invested. Heavenly hosts invest thee! Riches of men invest this Sacrificer! Heaven's son art thou. This is thine earthly station. Thine is the beast whose home is in the forest.
6.7 Encourager art thou. The hosts of heaven have come to yearning Gods, the best conductors. God Tvashtar, make the wealth of cattle quiet. Delightful to the taste be thine oblations.
6.8 Joy, wealthy ones! Brihaspati, save our riches. I bind thee with the noose of holy Order, thou offering to the Gods. Bold be the Slayer.
6.9 By impulse of God Savitar I bind thee, with arms of Asvins and with hands of Pûshan, thee welcome unto Agni and to Soma. Thee for the waters, thee for plants. Thy mother grant thee permission, and thy father, brother born of one dam, thy friend, thy herd-companion. I sprinkle thee welcome to Agni-Soma.
6.10 Drinker art thou of water. May the Waters, the Goddesses, add sweetness to the oblation prepared for Gods, even though already sweetened. Thy breath join wind, thy limbs those meet for worship, the sacrifice's lord the boon he prays for.
6.11 Balmed, both of you, with butter, guard the cattle. Grant, Rich! the Sacrificer's prayer. Approach thou. Meeting with heavenly Wind, from air's mid-region. Be thou united with this offering's body. O Great One, lead the sacrifice's master on to a sacrifice of loftier order. All-hail to Gods! To Gods All-hail!
6.12 Become no serpent, thou, become no viper. To thee, O widely-spread, be adoration. Advance, unhindered, on thy way. To rivers of butter move along the paths of Order.
6.13 Bear the oblation to the Gods, ye Waters celestial and pure and well-provided. May we become providers well-provided.
6.14 I cleanse thy voice, thy breath, thine eye, thine ear, thy navel, and thy feet, thy sexual organ, and thy rump.
6.15 Let thy mind, voice, and breath increase in fulness, thine eye be fuller, and thine ear grow stronger. Whatever there is in thee sore or wounded, may that be filled for thee, cleansed and united. Blest be the days. Plant, guard! Axe, do not harm him.
6.16 Thou art the demons’ share. Expelled are demons. Here I tread down; here I repel the demons; here lead the demons into lowest darkness. Invest, ye two, the heaven and earth with fatness. O Vâyu, eagerly enjoy the droppings. Let Agni eagerly enjoy the butter. All-hail! Go, both of you, by Svâhâ consecrated, to Ûrdhvanabhas, offspring of the Maruts.
6.17 Ye Waters, wash away this stain and whatsoever taint be here, Each sinful act that I have done, and every harmless curse of mine. May Waters rid me of that guilt, and Pavamâna set me free.
6.18 Be they united, with the Mind thy mind, and with the Breath thy breath. Thou quiverest. Let Agni make thee ready. Waters have washed together all thy juices. Thee for the Wind's rush, for the speed of Pûshan. From heated vapour may it reel and totter,—the disconcerted hatred of our foemen.
6.19 Ye drinkers-up of fatness, drink the fatness; drink up the gravy, drinkers of the gravy! Thou art the oblation of the air's mid-region. All-hail! The regions, the fore-regions, the by-regions, the intermediate and the upper regions,—to all the regions Hail!
6.20 In every limb is Indra's out-breath seated, in every limb is Indra's in-breath settled. God Tvashtar, let thine ample forms be blended, that what wears different shapes may be one-fashioned. To please thee let thy friends, mother and father, joy over thee as to the Gods thou goest.
6.21 Go to the sea. All-hail! Go to the air. All-hail! Go to God Savitar. All hail! Go thou to Mitra-Varuna. All-hail! Go thou to Day and Night. All-hail! Go to the Metres. till-hail! Go to Heaven and Earth. All-hail! Go to the sacrifice. All-hail! Go to Soma. All-hail! Go to the heavenly ether. All-hail! Go to Vaisvânara Agni. All hail! Bestow upon me mind and heart. Thy smoke mount to the sky, to heaven thy lustre. Fill thou the spacious earth full with thine ashes.
6.22 Harm not the Waters, do the Plants no damage. From every place, King Varuna, thence save us. Their saying that we swear our oath by sacred cows, by Varuna, O Varuna, save us therefrom. To us let Waters and let Plants be friendly; to him who hates us, whom we hate, unfriendly.
6.23 These waters teem with sacred food: rich in that food, one longs for them. Rich be the holy rite therein. In sacred food be Sûrya rich.
6.24 I set you down in Agni's seat whose home is indestructible. Indra-and-Agni's share are ye, Mitra-and-Varuna's share are ye. The share of all the Gods are ye. May waters gathered near the Sun, and those wherewith the Sun is joined, Speed on this sacred rite of ours.
6.25 Thee for the heart, thee for the mind, thee for the heaven, thee for the Sun. Bear up erect to heaven, to Gods, this rite these sacrificial calls.
6.26 Descend, O Soma, King, to all thy people. Down, unto thee, go, one and all, thy people! May Agni with his fuel hear my calling. Hear it the Waters and the Bowls, Divine Ones! Hear, Stones, as knowing sacrifice, my calling. May the God Savitar hear mine invocation. All hail!
6.27 Waters Divine, your wave, the Waters’ offspring, fit for oblation, potent, most delightful Upon those Gods among the Gods bestow it, who drink the pure, of whom ye are the portion. All-hail!
6.28 Drawing art thou: I draw thee up that Ocean ne’er may waste or wane. Let waters with the waters, and the plants commingle with the plants.
6.29 That man is lord of endless strength whom thou protectest in the fight, Agni, or urgest to the fray.
6.30 By impulse of God Savitar I take thee with arms of Asvins, with the hands of Pûshan. Free with thy gifts art thou. Perform for Indra this deep, most excellently ordered worship. With the most noble bolt I pay the worship enriched with strengthening food and milk and sweetness. Ye are Nigrâbhyâ waters. heard by Deities: make me content.
6.31 Content my mind, content my speech, content my breath, content mine eye, content mine ear, content my soul, content my progeny, content my herds, content the troops of men about me: never may the bands of men about me suffer thirst.
6.32 For Indra girt by Vasus and accompanied by Rudras, thee. For Indra with Âdityas, thee. For Indra foe-destroyer, thee. Thee for the Soma-bringing Hawk. For plenty-giving Agni, thee.
6.33 Soma, what light there is of thine in heaven, what on the earth, what in mid-air's wide region, Therewith give broad space to the Sacrificer for his enrichment: Comfort thou the giver.
6.34 Auspicious are ye, conquerors of Vritra, formed for bestowing wealth, the Immortal's Consorts. Lead to the Gods this sacrifice, Divine Ones! and at our invitation drink of Soma.
6.35 Be not afraid; shake not with terror. Take thou strength. Ye two Bowls, being firm, stay firm, and take ye strength. Mishap—not Soma—hath been killed.
6.36 East, west, north, south, from every side to meet thee let the regions run. Fill him, O Mother, let the noble meet together.
6.37 Thou, verily, O Mightiest, as God shalt gladden mortal man. O Bounteous Lord, there is no comforter but thou. Indra, I speak my words to thee.


11.1 Harnessing, first of all, the mind, Savitar having stretched the thought With reverent look upon the light of Agni bore them up from earth.
11.2 By impulse of God Savitar we with our spirit harnessed strive With might to win the heavenly.
11.3 Savitar, having harnessed Gods who go to light and heavenly thought, Who will create the lofty light—Savitar urge them on their way!
11.4 The priests of him the lofty priest well skilled in hymns, harness their spirit, yea, harness their holy thoughts. He only, skilled in rules, assigns their priestly tasks. Yea, lofty is the praise of Savitar the God.
11.5 I yoke with prayer your ancient inspiration: may the laud rise as on the prince's pathway. All Sons of the Immortal One shall hear it, who have resorted to celestial dwellings.
11.6 Even he, the God whose going forth and majesty the other Deities have followed with their might, He who hath measured the celestial regions out by his great power, he is the Courser Savitar.
11.7 Our sacrifice, God Savitar! speed forward: speed to his share the sacrifice's patron. May the celestial Gandharva, Cleanser of thought and will, make clean our thoughts and wishes. The Lord of Speech sweeten the words we utter!
11.8 God Savitar, speed this God-loved sacrifice of ours, friend-finding, ever-conquering, winning wealth and heaven. Speed praise-song with the sacred verse, Rathantara with Gâyatra, Brihat that runs in Gâyatra. All-hail!
11.9 By impulse of God Savitar I take thee, with arms of Asvins, with the hands of Pûshan, in Angiras’ manner, with Gâyatrî metre. From the earth's seat bring thou Purîshya Agni, as Angiras was wont, with Trishtup metre.
11.10 Spade art thou; woman art thou. Ours be power with thee to dig out Agni in his dwelling, as Angiras was wont, with Jagatî metre.
11.11 Savitar, bearing in his hand the gold spade which he took therewith, Looking with reverence on the light of Agni, raised it from the earth, With the Anushtup metre and as Angiras was wont to do.
11.12 Run hither, urged to speed, O Horse, along the most extended space. Thy loftiest birthplace is in heaven. thy navel is in air's mid-realm, the womb that bare thee is on earth.
11.13 Upon this course, O lords of wealth, harness; ye twain, the Ass who bears Agni, and kindly favours us.
11.14 In every need, in every race we call, as friends, to succour us, Indra, the mightiest of all.
11.15 Come speeding on and trampling imprecations; come gladdening to the chieftainship of Rudra. Speed through the wide air thou whose paths are pleasant, with Pûshan for thy mate, providing safety.
11.16 From the Earth's seat, like Anginas, bring thou Purîshya Agni forth. After the wont of Angiras we to Purîshya Agni go. Agni Purîshya we will bear after the went of Angiras.
11.17 Agni hath looked along the van of Mornings, looked on the days, the earliest Jâtavedas, And many a time along the beams of Sûrya: along the heaven and earth hast thou extended.
11.18 The Courser, started on his way, shakes from him all hostilities. He longs to look with reverent eye on Agni is the mighty. seat.
11.19 O Courser, having come to earth, seek Agni with a longing wish. Tell us by trampling on the ground where we may dig him from the earth.
11.20 Heaven is thy back, the earth thy seat, the air thy soul, the sea thy womb. Looking around thee with thine eye trample the adversaries down.
11.21 Wealth-giver, Courser, from this place step forth to great felicity. May we enjoy Earth's favour while we dig forth Agni from her
11.22 Down hath he stepped, wealth-giver, racer, courser. Good and auspicious room on earth thou madest. Thence let us dig forth Agni, fair to look on, while to the loftiest vault we mount, to heaven.
11.23 I thoughtfully besprinkle thee with butter, thee dwelling near to all existing creatures. Broad, vast through vital power that moves transversely, conspicuous, strong with all the food that feeds thee.
11.24 I sprinkle him who moves in all directions: may he accept it with a friendly spirit. Agni with bridegroom's face and lovely colour may not be touched when all his form is fury.
11.25 Round the oblation bath he paced, Agni the wise, the Lord of Strength, Giving the offerer precious boons.
11.26 We set thee round us as a fort, victorious Agni, thee a Sage, Of hero lineage, day by day destroyer of our treacherous foes.
11.27 Thou, Agni, with the days, fain to shine hitherward, art brought to life from out the waters, from the stone, From out the forest trees and herbs that grow on ground. thou, Sovran Lord of men, art generated pure.
11.28 At Savitar's, the Shining One's, impulsion, with arms of Asvins and with hands of Pûshan, As Angiras was wont to do, I dig thee forth from the seat of Earth, Agni Purîshya. Thee, Agni, luminous and fair of aspect, resplendent with imperishable lustre, gracious to living creatures, never harming, As Angiras was wont to do, we dig thee forth from the seat of Earth, Agni Purîshya.
11.29 Thou art the Waters’ back, the womb of Agni, around the ocean as it swells and surges. Waxing to greatness, resting on the lotus, spread thou in amplitude with heaven's own measure.
11.30 Yea are a shelter and a shield, uninjured both, and widely spread. Do ye; expansive, cover him: bear ye Purîshya Agni up.
11.31 Cover him, finders of the light, united both with breast and self, Bearing between you Agni, the refulgent, everlasting One.
11.32 Thou art Purîshya, thou support of all. Atharvan was the first, Agni, who rubbed thee into life. Agni, Atharvan brought thee forth by rubbing from the lotus, from The head of Visva, of the Priest.
11.33 Thee too as Vritra-slayer, thee breaker of forts, the Sage Dadhyach, Son of Atharvan, lighted up.
11.34 Pâthya the Bull, too, kindled thee the Dasyus’ most destructive foe, Winner of spoil in every fight.
11.35 Sit, Hotar, in the Hotar's place, observant: lay down the sacrifice in the place of worship. Thou, dear to Go is, shalt serve them with oblation. Agni, give long life to the Sacrificer.
11.36 Accustomed to the Hotar's place, the Hotar hath seated him, bright, splendid, passing mighty, Whose foresight keeps the Law from violation, excellent, pure-tongued, bringing thousands, Agni.
11.37 Seat thee, for thou art mighty: shine, best entertainer of the Gods. Worthy of sacred food, praised Agni! loose the smoke, ruddy and beautiful to see.
11.38 Pour heavenly Waters honey-sweet here for our health, for progeny. Forth from the place whereon they fall let plants with goodly berries spring.
11.39 May Vâyu Mâtarisvan heal and comfort thy broken heart as there supine thou liest. Thou unto whom the breath of Gods gives motion, to Ka, yea, unto thee, O God, be Vashat!
11.40 He, nobly born with lustre, shield and refuge, hath sat down in light. O Agni, Rich in Splendour, robe thyself in many-hued attire.
11.41 Lord of fair sacrifice; arise! With Godlike thought protect us well. With great light splendid to behold come, Agni, through sweet hymns of praise.
11.42 Rise up erect to give us aid, stand up like Savitar the God; Erect as strength-bestower when we call aloud, with unguents and with priests on thee.
11.43 Thou, being horn, art Child of Earth and Heaven, parted, fair Babe, among the plants, O Agni. The glooms of night thou, brilliant child, subduest, and art come forth, loud roaring, from the Mothers.
11.44 Steady be thou, and firm of limb. Steed, be a racer fleet of foot. Broad be thou, pleasant as a seat, bearing the store which Agni needs.
11.45 Be thou propitious, Angiras, to creatures of the human race. Set not on fire the heaven and earth, nor air's mid-region, nor the trees.
11.46 Forth with loud neighing go the Steed, the Ass that shouteth as he runs. Bearing Purîshya Agni on, let him not perish ere his time, Male bearer of male Agni, Child of Waters, Offspring of the Sea. Agni, come hither to the feast.
11.47 The Law the Truth, the Law the Truth. As Angiras was wont to do, we bear Purîshya Agni on. Ye Plants, with joyous welcome greet this Agni, auspicious One who cometh on to meet you. Removing all distresses and afflictions, here settle down and banish evil purpose.
11.48 Welcome him joyfully, ye Plants, laden with bloom and goodly fruit. This seasonable Child of yours hath settled in his ancient seat.
11.49 Resplendent with thy wide-extending lustre dispel the terrors of the fiends who hate us. May lofty Agni be my guide and shelter, ready to hear our call, the good Protector.
11.50 Ye, Waters, are beneficent, so help ye us to energy That we may look on great delight.
11.51 Give us a portion of the sap, the most propitious that ye have. Like mothers in their longing love.
11.52 To you we gladly come for him to whose abode ye lead us on: And, Waters, give us procreant strength.
11.53 Mitra, having commingled earth and ground together with the light For health to creatures mix I thee Omniscient and nobly born.
11.54 The Rudras, having mixed the earth, set all aglow the lofty light. Bright and perpetual their light verily shines among the Gods.
11.55 The lump of clay that hath been mixed by Vasus, Rudras, by the wise, May Sinîvâlî with her hands soften and fit it for the work.
11.56 May Sinîvâlî with fair braids, with beauteous crest, with lovely locks, May she, O mighty Aditi, bestow the Fire-pan in thy hands.
11.57 Aditi shape the Fire-pan with her power, her arms, her intellect, And in her womb bear Agni as a mother, in her lap, her son.
11.58 With Gâyatrî, like Angiras the Vasus form and fashion thee! Stedfast art then, thou art the Earth. Establish in me progeny, command of cattle, growth of wealth, kinsmen for me the worshipper. With Trishtup may the Rudras, like Angiras, form and fashion thee. Stedfast art thou, thou art the Air. Establish in me, etc., as above. With Jagatî, like Angiras, Âdityas form and fashion thee! Stedfast art thou, thou art the Sky. Establish in me, etc. Friends of all men, the All-Gods with Anushtup form thee Angiras-like. Stedfast art thou, thou art the Quarters. Establish in me, etc.
11.59 The zone of Aditi art thou. Aditi seize thy hollow space. She, having made the great Fire-pan, a womb for Agni, formed of clay, Aditi, gave it to her Sons and, Let them bake it, were her words.
11.60 The Vasus make thee fragrant, as Angiras did, with Gâyatrî! The Rudras make thee fragrant with the Trishtup, as did Angiras! With Gâyatrî, like Angiras, may the Âdityas perfume thee. Dear to all men, may the All-Gods with the Anushtup sweeten thee, as Angiras was wont to do. May Indra make thee odorous. May Varuna make thee odorous. May Vishnu make thee odorous.
11.61 Pit! Angiras-like may Aditi the Goddess, beloved by all Gods, dig thee in Earth's bosom. Pan! Angiras-like may the Gods’ heavenly Consorts, dear to all Gads, in the Earth's bosom place thee. Pan! Angiras-like may Dhishanâs, Divine Ones, dear to alt Gods, in the Earth's bosom light thee. Pan! Angiras-like may the divine Varûtrîs, dear to all Gods, in the earth's bosom heat thee, Pan! Angiras-like may the celestial Ladies, dear to all Gods, in the earth's bosom bake thee. Angiras-like may the celestial Matrons, beloved by all the Gods, with unclipped pinions, within the lap of Earth, O Fire pan, bake thee.
11.62 The gainful grace of Mitra, God, supporter of the race of man, Is glorious, of most wondrous fame.
11.63 With lovely arms, with lovely hands, with lovely fingers may the God Savitar make thee clean, yea, by the power be hath. Not trembling on the earth fill thou the regions, fill the Quarters full.
11.64 Having arisen wax thou great, yea, stand thou up immovable. To thee, O Mitra, I entrust this Fire-pan for security. May it remain without a break.
11.65 Thee may the Vasus, Angiras-like, fill with the metre Gâyatrî. Thee may the Rudras, Angiras-like, fill with the Trishtup metre full. Thee may Âdityas, Angiras-like, fill with the metre Jagatî. With the Anushtup metre may the All-Gods, dear to all men, fill thee full, as Angiras was wont.
11.66 Intention, Agni. Motive, Hail! Mind, Wisdom, Agni, Motive, Hail! Thought, Knowledge, Agni, Motive, Hail! Rule of Speech, Agni, Motive, Hail! To Manu Lord of creatures, Hail! To Agni dear to all men, Hail!
11.67 May every mortal man elect the friendship of the guiding God. Each one solicits him for wealth: let him seek fame to prosper him. All-hail!
11.68 Break not, nor suffer any harm. Endure, O Mother, and be brave; This work will thou and Agni do.
11.69 Be firm for weal, O Goddess Earth. Made in the wonted manner thou Art a celestial design. Acceptable to Gods he this oblation. Arise thou in this sacrifice uninjured.
11.70 Wood-fed, bedewed with sacred oil, ancient, Invoker, excellent, The Son of Strength, the Wonderful.
11.71 Abandoning the foeman's host, pass hither to this company: Assist the men with whom I stand.
11.72 From the remotest distance come, Lord of the Red Steeds, hitherward. Do thou Purîshya, Agni, loved of many, overcome our foes.
11.73 O Agni, whatsoever be the fuel that we lay on thee, May that he butter unto thee. Be pleased therewith, Most Youthful God.
11.74 That which the termite eats away, that over which the emmet crawls— Butter be all of this to thee. Be pleased therewith, Most Youthful God.
11.75 Bringing to him, with care unceasing, fodder day after day as to a stabled courser, Joying in food and in the growth of riches, may we thy neighbours, Agni, ne’er be injured.
11.76 While on earth's navel Agni is enkindled, we call, for ample increase of our riches, On Agni joying in the draught, much-lauded, worshipful; victor conquering in battle.
11.77 Whatever hosts there are, fiercely assailant, charging in lengthened lines, drawn up in order, Whatever thieves there are, whatever robbers, all these I cast into thy mouth, O Agni.
11.78 Devour the burglars with both tusks, destroy the robbers with thy teeth. With both thy jaws, thou Holy One, eat up those thieves well champed and chewed.
11.79 The burglars living among men, the thieves and robbers in the wood, Criminals lurking in their lairs, these do I lay between thy jaws.
11.80 Him who would seek to injure us, the man who looks oh us with hate Turn thou to ashes, and the man who slanders and would injure us.
11.81 Quickened is this my priestly rank, quickened is manly strength and force, Quickened is his victorious power of whom I am the Household priest.
11.82 The arms of these men have I raised, have raised their lustre and their strength With priestly power I ruin foes and lift my friends to high estate.
11.83 A share of food, O Lord of Food, vouchsafe us, invigorating food that brings no sickness. Onward, still onward lead the giver. Grant us maintenance both for quadruped and biped.


12.1 Far hath he shone abroad like gold to look on, beaming imperishable life for glory. Agni by vital powers became immortal when his prolific Father Dyaus begat him.
12.2 Night and Dawn, different in hue, accordant, meeting together, suckle one same infant. Golden between the heaven and earth he shineth. The wealth-possessing Gods supported Agni.
12.3 The Sapient One arrays himself in every form: for quadruped and biped he hath brought forth good. Excellent Savitar hath looked on heaven's high vault: he shineth after the outgoings of the Dawn.
12.4 Thou art the goodly-pinioned Bird: thou hast the Trivrit for thy head. Gâyatra is thine eye, thy wings are Brihat and Rathantara. The hymn is self, the metres are his limbs, the formulas his name. The Vâmadevya Sâman is thy form, the Yajñâyajñiya thy tail, the fire-hearths are thy hooves. Thou art the goodly-pinioned Bird: go skyward, soar to heavenly light.
12.5 Thou art the riyal-slaying stride of Vishnu. Mount the Gâyatra metre: stride along the earth. Thou art the foe-destroying stride of Vishnu. Mount the Trishtup metre: stride along mid-air. Thou art the traitor-slaying stride of Vishnu. Mount the Jagatî metre: stride along the sky. Thou art the foeman-slaying stride of Vishnu. Mount Anushtup metre: stride along the Quarters.
12.6 Agni roared out like Dyaus what time he thunders: licking full oft the earth round plants he flickered. At once, when born, he looked about, enkindled: he shineth forth between the earth and heaven.
12.7 Return to me, thou still-returning Agni, with life, with lustre, progeny, and treasure, With profit, wisdom, riches, and abundance.
12.8 A hundred, Agni Angiras! be thy ways, a thousand thy returns. With increment of increase bring thou back to us what we have lost. Again bring hitherward our wealth.
12.9 Return again with nourishment; Agni, again with food and life. Again preserve us from distress.
12.10 Agni, return with store of wealth. Swell with thine overflowing stream that feedeth all on every side.
12.11 I brought thee: thou hast entered in. Stand stedfast and immovable. Lot all the people long for thee. Let not thy kingship fall away.
12.12 Varuna, from the upmost bond release us, let down the lowest and remove the midmost. So in thy holy law may we made sinless belong to Aditi, O thou Âditya.
12.13 High hath the Mighty risen before the Mornings, and come to us with light from out the darkness. Fair-shapen Agni with white-shining splendour hath filled at birth all human habitations.
12.14 The Hamsa homed in light, the Vasu in mid-air, the Priest beside the altar, Guest within the house, Dweller in noblest place, mid men, in truth, in sky, born of flood, kine, truth, mountain, he is holy Law. The Great.
12.15 Knowing all holy ordinances, Agni, be seated in the lap of this thy mother. Do not with heat or glowing flame consume her: shine thou within her with refulgent lustre.
12.16 Within this Fire-pan with thy light, O Agni, in thy proper seat, Glowing with warmth, be gracious thou, O Jâtavedas, unto her.
12.17 Being propitious unto me, O Agni, sit propitiously. Having made all the regions blest, in thine own dwelling seat thyself.
12.18 First Agni sprang to life from out of heaven, the second time from us came Jâtavedas. Thirdly the Manly-souled was in the waters. The pious lauds and kindles him Eternal.
12.19 Agni, we know thy three powers in three stations, we know thy forms in many a place divided. We know what name supreme thou hast in secret: we know the source from which thou hast proceeded.
12.20 The Manly-souled lit thee in sea and waters, Man's Viewer lit thee in the breast of heaven. There as thou stoodest in the third high region the Bulls increased thee in the waters’ bosom.
12.21 Agni roared out, etc. (verse 6 repeated).
12.22 The spring of glories and support of riches, rouser of thoughts and guardian of the Soma, Good Son of Strength, a King amid the waters, in forefront of the Dawns he shines enkindled.
12.23 Germ of the world, ensign of all creation, he sprang to life and filled the earth and heaven. Even the firm rock he cleft when passing over, when the Five Tribes brought sacrifice to Agni.
12.24 So among mortals was immortal Agni stablished as cleansing, wise, and eager envoy. He waves the red smoke that he lifts above him, striving to reach the heaven with radiant lustre.
12.25 Far hath he shone, etc. (verse 1 repeated).
12.26 Whoso this day, O God whose flames are lovely, makes thee a cake, O Agni, mixed with butter, Lead thou and further him to higher fortune, to bliss bestowed by Gods, O thou Most Youthful.
12.27 Endow him, Agni, with a share of glory, at every, song of praise sung forth enrich him. Dear let him be to Sûrya, dear to Agni, preëminent with son and children's children.
12.28 While, Agni, day by day men pay thee worship they win themselves all treasures worth the wishing. Allied with thee, eager and craving riches, they have disclosed the stable filled with cattle.
12.29 Agni, man's gracious Friend, the Soma's keeper, Vaisvânara, hath been lauded by the Rishis. We will invoke benignant Earth and Heaven: ye Deities, give us wealth with hero children.
12.30 Pay service unto Agni with your fuel, rouse your Guest with oil: In him present your offerings.
12.31 May all the Gods, O Agni, bear thee upward with their earnest thoughts: Not to be looked on, rich in light, be thou propitious unto us,
12.32 Agni, go forth resplendent, thou with thine auspicious flames of fire. Shining with mighty beams of light harm not my people with thy form.
12.33 Agni roared out, etc. (verse 21 repeated.)
12.34 Far famed is this the Bharata's own Agni: he shineth like the Sun with lofty splendour. He who hath vanquished Pûru in the battle, the heavenly Guest hath shone for us benignly.
12.35 Receive these ashes, ye celestial Waters, and lay them in a fair place full of fragrance. To him bow down the nobly-wedded Matrons! Bear this on waters as her son a mother.
12.36 Agni, thy home is in the floods: into the plants thou forcest way, And as their child art born anew.
12.37 Thou art the offspring of the plants, thou art the offspring of the trees: The offspring thou of all that is, thou, Agni, art the Waters’ Child,
12.38 With ashes having reached the womb, the waters, Agni and the earth, United with the mothers, thou blazing hast seated thee again.
12.39 Seated again upon thy seat, the waters, Agni! and the earth, In her, thou, most auspicious One, liest as in a mother's lap
12.40, 41 Return again, etc. Agni, return, etc. (verses 9 and 10 repeated).
12.42 Mark this my speech, Divine One, thou Most Youthful, offered to thee by him who gives most freely: One hates thee, and another sings thy praises. I thine adorer laud thy form, O Agni.
12.43 Be thou for us a liberal Prince, Giver and Lord of precious things. Drive those who hate us far away. To the Omnific One All-hail!
12.44 Again let the Âdityas, Rudras, Yams, and Brahmans with their rites light thee, Wealth-bringer! Increase thy body with presented butter: effectual be the Sacrificer's wishes.
12.45 Go hence, depart, creep off in all directions, both ancient visitors and recent comers: Yama hath given a place on earth to rest in. This place for him the Fathers have provided.
12.46 Knowledge art thou: accomplishment of wishes. In me be the fulfilment of thy wishes. Thou art the ashes, thou the mould of Agni. Rankers are ye, rankers around. Rankers right upward, be ye fixed.
12.47 This is that Agni where the longing Indra took the pressed Soma deep within his body. Winner of spoils in thousands like a courser, with prayer art thou exalted, Jâtavedas.
12.48 The splendour which is thine in heaven, O Agni, in earth, O Holy One, in plants, in waters, Wherewith thou hast o’erspread mid-air's broad region, that light is brilliant, billowy, man-surveying.
12.49 O Agni, to the flood of heaven thou mountest, thou tallest hither Gods, the thought-inspirers. The waters, those beyond the light of Sûrya, and those that are beneath it here, approach thee.
12.50 May the Purîshya Agnis in accord with those that spring from floods, May they, benevolent, accept the sacrifice, full, wholesome draughts.
12.51 As holy food, Agni, to thine invoker give wealth in cattle, lasting, rich in marvels. To us be born a son and spreading offspring. Agni, be this thy gracious will to us-ward.
12.52 This is thine ordered place of birth whence, sprung to life, thou shonest forth. Knowing this, Agni, mount on high and cause our riches to increase.
12.53 Ranker art thou: Angiras-like sit steady with that Deity. Ranker-round art thou: Angiras-like sit steady with that Deity.
12.54 Fill up the room, supply the void, then settle steady in thy place. Indr-Âgni and Brihaspati have set thee down in this abode.
12.55 The dappled kine who stream with milk prepare his draught of Soma juice— Clans in the birthplace of the Gods, in the three luminous realms of heaven.
12.56 All sacred songs have magnified Indra expansive as the sea, The best of warriors borne on cars, the Lord, the very Lord of Strength.
12.57 Combine ye two and harmonize together, dear to each other, brilliant, friendly-minded, Abiding in one place for food and vigour.
12.58 Together have I brought your minds, your ordinances, and your thoughts. Be thou our Sovran Lord, Agni Purîshya; give food and vigour to the Sacrificer.
12.59 Thou art Purîshya Agni, thou art wealthy, thou art prosperous. Having made all the regions blest, here seat thee in thine own abode.
12.60 Be ye one-minded unto us, both of one thought, free from deceit. Harm not the sacrifice, harm not the Patron of the sacrifice. Be gracious unto us to-day, ye knowers of all things that be.
12.61 Even as a mother bears her son, Earth, Ukhâ hath borne within her womb Purîshya Agni. Maker of all, accordant with the All-Gods and Seasons, may Prajâpati release her.
12.62 Seek him who pours not, offers not oblation; follow the going of the thief and robber. This is thy way; leave us and seek some other. To thee, O Goddess Nirriti, be homage.
12.63 To thee, sharp-pointed Nirriti, full homage! Loose and detach this iron bond that binds him. Unanimous with Yama and with Yamî to the sublimest vault of heaven uplift him.
12.64 Thou, Awful One, thou in whose mouth I offer for the unloosing of these binding fetters, Whom people hail as Earth with their glad voices, as Nirriti in every place I know thee.
12.65 The binding noose which Nirriti the Goddess hath fastened on thy neck that none may loose it, I loose for thee as from the midst of Âyus. Sped forward now, eat thou the food we offer: To Fortune, her who hath done this, be homage.
12.66 Establisher, the gatherer of treasures, he looks with might on every form and figure. Like Savitar the God whose laws are constant, like Indra, he hath stood where meet the pathways.
12.67 Wise, through desire of bliss with Gods, the skilful bind the traces fast, and lay the yokes on either side.
12.68 Lay on the yokes and fasten well the traces; formed is the furrow sow the seed within it. Through song may we find hearing fraught with plenty: near to the ripened grain approach the sickle.
12.69 Happily let the shares turn up the ploughland, happily go the ploughers with the oxen! Suna and Sîra, pleased with our oblation, cause ye our plants to bear abundant fruitage.
12.70 Approved by Visvedevas and by Maruts, balmed be the furrow with sweet-flavoured fatness. Succulent, teeming with thy milky treasure, turn hitherward to us with milk, O Furrow.
12.71 The keen-shared plough that bringeth bliss, good for the Soma-drinker's need, Shear out for me a cow, a sheep, a rapid drawer of the car, a blooming woman, plump and strong!
12.72 Milk out their wish, O Wishing-Cow, to Mitra and to Varuna, To Indra, to the Asvins, to Pûshan, to people and to plants.
12.73 Be loosed, inviolable, Godward-farers! We have attained the limit of this darkness: we have won the light.
12.74 The year together with the darksome fortnights; Dawn with the ruddy-coloured cows about her; the Asvins with their wonderful achievements; the Sun together with his dappled Courser; Vaisvânara with Idâ and with butter. Svâhâ!
12.75 Herbs that sprang up in time of old, three ages earlier than the Gods,— Of these, whose hue is brown, will I declare the hundred powers and seven.
12.76 Ye, Mothers, have a hundred homes, yea, and a thousand are your growths. Do ye who have a thousand powers free this my patient from disease.
12.77 Be glad and joyful in the Plants, both blossoming and bearing fruit, Plants that will lead us to success like mares who conquer in the race.
12.78 Plants, by this name I speak to you, Mothers, to you the Goddesses: Steed, cow, and garment may I win, win back thy very self, O man.
12.79 The Holy Fig tree is your home, your mansion is the Parna tree: Winners of cattle shall ye be if ye regain for me this man.
12.80 He who hath store of Herbs at hand like Kings amid a crowd of men,— Physician is that sage's name, fiend-slayer, chaser of disease.
12.81 Herbs rich in Soma, rich in steeds, in nourishment in strengthening power, All these have I provided here, that this man may be whole again.
12.82 The healing virtues of the Plants stream forth like cattle from the stall,— Plants that shall win me store of wealth, and save thy vital breath, O man.
12.83 Reliever is your mother's name, and hence Restorers are ye called. Rivers are ye with wings that fly: keep far whatever brings disease.
12.84 Over all fences have they passed, as steals a thief into the fold. The Plants have driven from the frame whatever malady was there.
12.85 When, bringing back the vanished strength, I hold these herbs within my hand, The spirit of disease departs ere he can seize upon the life.
12.86 He through whose frame, O Plants, ye creep member by member, joint by joint, From him ye drive away disease like some strong arbiter of strife.
12.87 Fly, Spirit of Disease, begone, with the blue jay and kingfisher. Fly, with the wind's impetuous speed, vanish together with the storm.
12.88 Help every one the other, lend assistance each of you to each, All of you be accordant, give furtherance to this speech of mine.
12.89 Let fruitful Plants, and fruitless, those that blossom, and the blossomless, Urged onward by Brihaspati, release us from our pain and grief;
12.90 Release me from the curse's plague and woe that comes from Varuna; Free me from Yama's fetter, from sin and offence against the Gods.
12.91 What time, descending from the sky, the Plants flew earthward, thus they spake: No evil shall befall the man whom while he liveth we pervade.
12.92 Of all the many Plants whose King is Soma, Plants of hundred forms, Thou art the Plant most excellent, prompt to the wish, sweet to the heart.
12.93 O all ye various Herbs whose King is Soma, that o’erspread the earth, Urged onward by Brihaspati, combine your virtue in this Plant.
12.94 All Plants that hear this speech, and those that have departed far away, Come all assembled and confer your healing power upon this Herb.
12.95 Unharmed be he who digs you up, unharmed the man for whom I dig: And let no malady attack biped or quadruped of ours.
12.96 With Soma as their Sovran Lord the Plants hold colloquy and say: O King, we save from death the man whose cure a Brâhman undertakes.
12.97 Most excellent of all art thou, O Plant: thy vassals are the trees. Let him be subject to our power, the man who seeks to injure us.
12.98 Banisher of catarrh art thou, of tumours and of hemorrhoids; Thou banished Pâkâru and Consumption in a hundred forms.
12.99 Thee did Gandharvas dig from earth, thee Indra and Brihaspati. King Soma, knowing thee, O Plant, from his Consumption was made free.
12.100 Conquer mine enemies, the men who challenge me do thou subdue. Conquer thou all unhappiness: victorious art thou, O Plant.
12.101 Long-lived be he who digs thee, Plant, and he for whom I dig thee up. So mayst thou also, grown long-lived, rise upward with a hundred shoots.
12.102 Most excellent of all art thou, O Plant; thy vassals are the trees. Let him be subject to our power, the man who seeks to injure us.
12.103 May he not harm me who is earth's begetter, nor he whose laws are faithful, sky's pervades; Nor he who first begot the lucid waters. To Ka the God let us present oblation.
12.104 Turn thyself hitherward, O Earth, to us with sacrifice and milk. Thy covering skin Agni, urged forth, hath mounted.
12.105 All, Agni, that in thee is bright, pure, cleansed, and meet for sacrifice, That do we bring unto the Gods.
12.106 I from this place have fed on strength and vigour, the womb of holy Law, stream of the mighty. In cows let it possess me and in bodies. I quit decline and lack of food, and sickness.
12.107 Agni, life-power and fame are thine: thy fires blaze mightily, thou rich in wealth of beams! Sage, passing bright, thou givest to the worshipper, with strength, the food that merits laud.
12.108 With brilliant, purifying sheen, with perfect sheen thou liftest up thyself in light. Thou, visiting both thy Mothers, aidest them as Son: thou joinest close the earth and heaven.
12.109 O Jâtavedas, Son of Strength, rejoice thyself, gracious, in our fair hymns and songs. In thee are treasured various forms of strengthening food, born nobly and of wondrous help.
12.110 Agni, spread forth, as Ruler, over living things: give wealth to us, Immortal God. Thou shinest out from beauty fair to look upon: thou leadest us to conquering power.
12.111 To him, the wise, who orders sacrifice, who hath great riches under his control, Thou givest blest award of good, and plenteous food, givest him wealth that conquers all.
12.112 The men have set before them for their welfare Agni, strong, visible to all, the Holy. Thee, Godlike One, with ears to hear, most famous, men's generations magnify with praise-songs.
12.113 Soma, wax great. From every side may vigorous powers unite in thee. Be in the gathering-place of strength.
12.114 In thee be juicy nutriments united, and power and mighty foe-subduing vigour. Waxing to immortality, O Soma, win highest glory for thyself in heaven.
12.115 Wax, O most gladdening Soma, great through all thy filaments, and be A friend of most illustrious fame to prosper us.
12.116 May Vatsa draw thy mind away, even from thy loftiest dwelling-place, Agni, with song that yearns for thee.
12.117 Agni, best Angiras, to thee all people who have pleasant homes Apart have turned to gain their wish.
12.118 In dear homes, Agni, the desire of all that is and is to be, Shines forth the One Imperial Lord.

25.1 Gratify Fresh Grass with his teeth, Avakâ with his gums, Clay with his tooth-sockets, Tegas with his fangs. The tongue-tip for Sarasvatî; I gratify the root of the tongue and the palate with his neigh, Vâja with his jaws, the Waters with his mouth, the Stallion with his testicles, the Âdityas with the beard, Path with his eyebrows, Heaven and Earth with his eyelashes, Lightning with the pupils of his eyes. Hail to the white! Hail to the black! Effectual are his eyelashes, irresistible are his lower eyelashes; irresistible are his eyelashes, effectual are his lower eyelashes.
25.2 With his breath I gratify Vâta; with his outbreath the two Nostrils; with his lower lip the Upayâma; with his upper lip Existence. With his bright look I please Antara, with his reflection Bâhya; the Whirlpool with his head; Thunder with his frontal bone; the Lightning-flash with his brain; Lightning with the pupils of his eyes; Hearing with his external ears; Ears with his internal ears; Blood with his lower neck; Waters with the fleshless part of his neck; Thought with the back neck-tendons; Aditi with his head; Nirriti with his ragged head; Vital Breathings with his roars; Tempest with his crest.
25.3 I gratify Flies with his hair; Indra with his active shoulder; Brihaspati with his quick spring; Tortoises with his hoofs; Approach with his fetlocks; Kapiñjalas with his heel-ropes; Speed with his two thighs; the Way with his two fore-legs; the Forest-God with a kneepan; Agni with his two knees; Pûshan with his two fore-feet; the Asvins with his shoulders; Rudra with his shoulder-joints,
25.4 The first rib is Agni's; the second Vâyu's; the third Indra's; the fourth Soma's; the fifth Aditi's; the sixth Indrânî's; the seventh the Maruts’; the eighth Brihaspati's; the ninth Aryaman's; the tenth Dhâtar's; the eleventh Indra's; the twelfth Varuna's; the thirteenth Yama's.
25.5 (On the left side) the first rib belongs to Indra-Agni; the second to Sarasvatî; the third to Mitra; the fourth to the Waters; the fifth to Nirriti; the sixth to Agni-Soma; the seventh to the Serpents; the eighth to Vishnu; the ninth to Pûshan; the tenth to Tvashtar; the eleventh to Indra; the twelfth to Varuna; the thirteenth to Yama. The right flank belongs to Heaven and Earth, the left to the All-Gods.
25.6 The shoulders belong to the Maruts; the first rib-cartilages to the All-Gods; the second to the Rudras; the third to the Âdityas; the tail belongs to Vâyu; the hind-quarters to Agni-Soma. I gratify the two Curlews with the hips; Indra-Brihaspati with the thighs; Mitra-Varuna with the groins; Approach with the buttocks; Strength with the two cavities of the loins.
25.7 I gratify Pûshan with the rectum; Blind-worms with the large intestines; Serpents with the entrails; Worms with the guts; the Waters with the bladder; Scrotum with the testicles; the Vâjins with his penis; Offspring with his seed; Blue jays with his bile; Fissures with his arms; Kûshmas with his lumps of dung.
25.8 His chest belongs to Indra; his belly to Aditi; his clavicles to the Quarters; his nether hind-part to Aditi. I gratify Clouds with his aorta; Firmament with his pericardium; Mist with his belly; the two Chakravâkas with his cardiac bones; Sky with his kidneys; Mountains with his ducts; hocks with his spleen; Ant-hills with his lungs; Shrubs with his heart-vessels; Streams with his veins; Lakes with his flanks; Sea with his belly; Vaisvânara with his ashes.
25.9 I gratify Separation with his navel; Butter with his flavour; the Waters with his broth; Sunbeams with his drops of fat; Hoar-frost with his heat; Ice with his marrow; Hailstones with his tears; Thunderbolts with the rheum of his eyes; Râkshasas with his blood; Bright things with his limbs; Stars with his beauty; Earth with his skin. All-hail to Jumbaka!
25.10 In the beginning rose Hiranyagarbha, etc., as in XIII. 4; XXIII. 1.
25.11 Who by his grandeur, etc., as in XXIII. 3.
25.12 Whose, by his might, are these snow-covered mountains, and men call sea and Rasâ his possession: Whose are these arms, whose are these heavenly regions. What God shall we adore with our oblation?
25.13 Giver of vital breath, of power and vigour, he whose commandment all the Gods acknowledge: The Lord of death, whose shade is life immortal. What God shall we adore with our oblation?
25.14 May powers auspicious come to us from every side, never deceived, unhindered and victorious, That the Gods ever may be with us for our gain, our guardians day by day, unceasing in their care.
25.15 May the auspicious favour of the Gods be ours, on us descend the bounty of the righteous Gods. The friendship of the Gods have we devoutly sought: so may the Gods extend our life that we may live.
25.16 We call them hither with a hymn of olden time, Bhaga, the friendly Daksha, Mitra, Aditi, Aryaman, Varuna, Soma, the Asvins. May Sarasvatî, auspicious, grant felicity.
25.17 May the Wind waft to us that pleasant medicine, may Earth our Mother give it, and our Father Heaven, And the joy-giving stones that press the Soma's juice. Asvins, may ye, for whom our spirits long, hear this.
25.18 Him we invoke for aid who reigns supreme, the Lord of all that stands or moves, inspirer of the soul, That Pûshan may promote the increase of our wealth, our keeper and our guard infallible for our good.
25.19 Illustrious far and wide, may Indra prosper us: may Pûshan prosper us, the Master of all wealth. May Târkshya with uninjured fellies prosper us: Brihaspati vouchsafe to us prosperity.
25.20 The Maruts, Sons of Prisni, borne by spotted steeds, moving in glory, oft visiting holy rites, Sages whose tongue is Agni and their eyes the Sun,——hither let all the Gods for our protection come.
25.21 Gods, may we with our ears listen to what is good, and with our eyes see what is good, ye Holy Ones. With limbs and bodies firm may we extolling you attain the term of life appointed by the Gods.
25.22 A hundred autumns stand before us, O ye Gods, within whose space ye bring our bodies to decay; Within whose space our sons become fathers in turn. Break ye not in the midst our course of fleeting life.
25.23 Aditi is the heaven, Aditi is mid-air, Aditi is the Mother and the Sire and Son. Aditi is all Gods, Aditi five-classed men, Aditi all that hath been born and shall be born.
25.24 Slight us not Varuna, Aryaman, or Mitra, Ribhukshan, Indra, Âyu, or the Maruts, When we declare amid the congregation the virtues of the Strong Steed, God-descended.
25.25 What time they bear before the Courser, covered with trappings and with wealth, the grasped oblation, The dappled goat goeth straightforward, bleating, to the place dear to Indra and to Pûshan.
25.26 Dear to all Gods, this goat, the share of Pûshan, is first led forward with the vigorous Courser, While Tvashtar sends him forward with the Charger, acceptable for sacrifice, to glory.
25.27 When thrice the men lead round the Steed, in order, who goeth to the Gods as meet oblation, The goat precedeth him, the share of Pûshan, and to the Gods the sacrifice announceth.
25.28 Invoker, ministering priest, stoner, fire-kindler, Soma-presser, sage, reciter, With this well ordered sacrifice, well finished, do ye fill full the channels of the rivers.
25.29 The hewers of the post and those who carry it, and those who carve the knob to deck the Horse's stake; Those who prepare the cooking-vessels for the Steed,—may the approving help of these promote our work.
25.30 Forth, for the regions of the Gods, the Charger with his smooth back is come; my prayer attends him. In him rejoice the singer and the sages. A good friend have we won for the Gods’ banquet.
25.31 May the fleet Courser's halter and his heel-ropes, the headstall and the girths and cords about him, And the grass put within his mouth to bait him,—among the Gods, too, let all these be with thee.
25.32 What part of the Steed's flesh the fly hath eaten, or is left sticking to the post or hatchet, Or to the slayer's hands and nails adhereth,—among the Gods, tog, may all this he with thee.
25.33 Food undigested steaming from his belly, and any odour of raw flesh remaining, This let the immolators set in order and dress the sacrifice with perfect cooking.
25.34 What from thy body which with fire is roasted, when thou art set upon the spit, distilleth,— Let not that lie on earth or grass neglected, but to the longing Gods let all be offered.
25.35 They who, observing that the Horse is ready, call out and say, The smell is good; remove it; And, craving meat, await the distribution,—may their approving help promote our labour.
25.36 The trial-fork of the flesh cooking caldron, the vessels out of which the broth is sprinkled, The warming-pots, the covers of the dishes, hooks, carving-boards,—all these attend the Charger.
25.37 Let not the fire, smoke-scented, make thee crackle, nor glowing caldron smell and break to pieces. Offered, beloved, approved, and consecrated,—such Charger do the Gods accept with favour.
25.38 The starting-place, his place of rest and rolling, the ropes wherewith the Charger's feet were fastened, The water that he drank, the food he tasted,—among the Gods, too, may all these attend thee.
25.39 The robe they spread upon the Horse to clothe him, the upper covering and the golden trappings, The halters which restrain the Steed, the heel-ropes,—all these, as grateful to the Gods, they offer.
25.40 If one, when seated, with excessive urging hath with his heel or with his whip distressed thee, All these thy woes, as with oblation's ladle at sacrifices, with my prayer I banish.
25.41 The four-and-thirty ribs of the swift Courser, kin to the Gods, the slayer's hatchet pierces. Cut ye with skill so that the parts be flawless, and piece by piece declaring them dissect them.
25.42 Of Tvashtar's Courser there is one dissector: this is the custom: two there are who guide him. Such of his limbs as I divide in order, all these, amid the lumps, in fire I offer.
25.43 Let not thy dear soul burn thee as thou comest, let not the hatchet linger in thy body. Let not a greedy clumsy immolator, missing the joints, mangle thy limbs unduly.
25.44 No, here thou diest not, thou art not injured: only by easy paths to Gods thou goest. Both Bays, both Spotted Mares are now thy fellows, and to the Ass's pole is yoked the Courser.
25.45 May this Steed bring us all-sustaining riches, wealth in good kine, good horses, manly offspring. Freedom from sin may Aditi vouchsafe us; the Steed with our oblations gain us lordship!
25.46 We will, with Indra and all Gods to help us, bring these existing worlds into subjection. With the Âdityas, with the band of Maruts, may Indra give us medicine to heal us. Our sacrifice, our bodies, and our offspring may Indra regulate with the Âdityas.
25.47 O Agni, be our nearest Friend, etc., as in III. 25. To thee then, O Most Bright, etc., as in III. 26.